Akrotiri  (Europe)

Introduction ::Akrotiri




Background:


By terms of the 1960 Treaty of Establishment that created the
independent Republic of Cyprus, the UK retained full sovereignty and
jurisdiction over two areas of almost 254 square kilometers -
Akrotiri and Dhekelia. The southernmost and smallest of these is the
Akrotiri Sovereign Base Area, which is also referred to as the
Western Sovereign Base Area.







Geography ::Akrotiri




Location:


Eastern Mediterranean, peninsula on the southwest coast of Cyprus



Geographic coordinates:


34 37 N, 32 58 E



Map references:


Europe



Area:


total: 123 sq km
country comparison to the world: 223
note: includes a salt lake and wetlands



Area - comparative:


about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


total: 47.4 km

border countries: Cyprus 47.4 km



Coastline:


56.3 km



Climate:


temperate; Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and cool winters



Environment - current issues:


hunting around the salt lake; note - breeding place for loggerhead
and green turtles; only remaining colony of griffon vultures is on
the base



Geography - note:


British extraterritorial rights also extended to several small
off-post sites scattered across Cyprus; of the Sovereign Base Area
(SBA) land, 60% is privately owned and farmed, 20% is owned by the
Ministry of Defense, and 20% is SBA Crown land







People ::Akrotiri




Population:


approximately 15,700 live on the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri
and Dhekelia including 7,700 Cypriots, 3,600 Service and UK-based
contract personnel, and 4,400 dependents
country comparison to the world: 219


Languages:


English, Greek







Government ::Akrotiri




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Akrotiri



Dependency status:


a special form of UK overseas territory; administered by an
administrator who is also the Commander, British Forces Cyprus



Capital:


name: Episkopi Cantonment (base administrative center for Akrotiri
and Dhekelia)

geographic coordinates: 34 40 N, 32 51 E

time difference: UTC+2 (7 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins last Sunday in March; ends last
Sunday in October



Constitution:


Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia Order in Council 1960,
effective 16 August 1960, functions as a basic legal document



Legal system:


the Sovereign Base Area Administration has its own court system to
deal with civil and criminal matters; laws applicable to the Cypriot
population are, as far as possible, the same as the laws of the
Republic of Cyprus



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)

head of government: Administrator Major General Jamie GORDON (since
October 2008); note - reports to the British Ministry of Defense

elections: none; the monarchy is hereditary; the administrator
appointed by the monarch



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Flag description:


the flag of the UK is used



National anthem:


note: as a United Kingdom area of special sovereignty, "God Save the
Queen" is official (see United Kingdom)







Economy ::Akrotiri




Economy - overview:


Economic activity is limited to providing services to the military
and their families located in Akrotiri. All food and manufactured
goods must be imported.



Exchange rates:


euros (EUR) per US dollar - 0.7715 (2010), 0.7338 (2009), 0.6827
(2008)

note: on 1 January 2008 Akrotiri and Dhekelia adopted the euro along
with the rest of Cyprus







Communications ::Akrotiri




Broadcast media:


British Forces Broadcast Service (BFBS) provides multi-channel
satellite TV service as well as BFBS radio broadcasts to the
Akrotiri Sovereign Base (2009)








Military ::Akrotiri




Military - note:


Akrotiri has a full RAF base, Headquarters for British Forces
Cyprus, and Episkopi Support Unit










page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





