Antarctica  (Antarctica)

Introduction ::Antarctica




Background:


Speculation over the existence of a "southern land" was not
confirmed until the early 1820s when British and American commercial
operators and British and Russian national expeditions began
exploring the Antarctic Peninsula region and other areas south of
the Antarctic Circle. Not until 1840 was it established that
Antarctica was indeed a continent and not just a group of islands or
an area of ocean. Several exploration "firsts" were achieved in the
early 20th century, but generally the area saw little human
activity. Following World War II, however, there was an upsurge in
scientific research on the continent. A number of countries have set
up a range of year-round and seasonal stations, camps, and refuges
to support scientific research in Antarctica. Seven have made
territorial claims, but not all countries recognize these claims. In
order to form a legal framework for the activities of nations on the
continent, an Antarctic Treaty was negotiated that neither denies
nor gives recognition to existing territorial claims; signed in
1959, it entered into force in 1961.







Geography ::Antarctica




Location:


continent mostly south of the Antarctic Circle



Geographic coordinates:


90 00 S, 0 00 E



Map references:


Antarctic Region



Area:


total: 14 million sq km

land: 14 million sq km (280,000 sq km ice-free, 13.72 million sq km
ice-covered) (est.)

note: fifth-largest continent, following Asia, Africa, North
America, and South America, but larger than Australia and the
subcontinent of Europe



Area - comparative:


slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US



Land boundaries:


0 km

note: see entry on Disputes - international



Coastline:


17,968 km



Maritime claims:


Australia, Chile, and Argentina claim Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
rights or similar over 200 nm extensions seaward from their
continental claims, but like the claims themselves, these zones are
not accepted by other countries; 21 of 28 Antarctic consultative
nations have made no claims to Antarctic territory (although Russia
and the US have reserved the right to do so) and do not recognize
the claims of the other nations; also see the Disputes -
international entry



Climate:


severe low temperatures vary with latitude, elevation, and distance
from the ocean; East Antarctica is colder than West Antarctica
because of its higher elevation; Antarctic Peninsula has the most
moderate climate; higher temperatures occur in January along the
coast and average slightly below freezing



Terrain:


about 98% thick continental ice sheet and 2% barren rock, with
average elevations between 2,000 and 4,000 meters; mountain ranges
up to nearly 5,000 meters; ice-free coastal areas include parts of
southern Victoria Land, Wilkes Land, the Antarctic Peninsula area,
and parts of Ross Island on McMurdo Sound; glaciers form ice shelves
along about half of the coastline, and floating ice shelves
constitute 11% of the area of the continent



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Bentley Subglacial Trench -2,540 m

highest point: Vinson Massif 4,897 m

note: the lowest known land point in Antarctica is hidden in the
Bentley Subglacial Trench; at its surface is the deepest ice yet
discovered and the world's lowest elevation not under seawater



Natural resources:


iron ore, chromium, copper, gold, nickel, platinum and other
minerals, and coal and hydrocarbons have been found in small
uncommercial quantities; none presently exploited; krill, finfish,
and crab have been taken by commercial fisheries



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (ice 98%, barren rock 2%) (2005)



Natural hazards:


katabatic (gravity-driven) winds blow coastward from the high
interior; frequent blizzards form near the foot of the plateau;
cyclonic storms form over the ocean and move clockwise along the
coast; volcanism on Deception Island and isolated areas of West
Antarctica; other seismic activity rare and weak; large icebergs may
calve from ice shelf



Environment - current issues:


in 1998, NASA satellite data showed that the Antarctic ozone hole
was the largest on record, covering 27 million square kilometers;
researchers in 1997 found that increased ultraviolet light passing
through the hole damages the DNA of icefish, an Antarctic fish
lacking hemoglobin; ozone depletion earlier was shown to harm
one-celled Antarctic marine plants; in 2002, significant areas of
ice shelves disintegrated in response to regional warming



Geography - note:


the coldest, windiest, highest (on average), and driest continent;
during summer, more solar radiation reaches the surface at the South
Pole than is received at the Equator in an equivalent period; mostly
uninhabitable







People ::Antarctica




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants, but there are both permanent and
summer-only staffed research stations

note: 29 nations, all signatory to the Antarctic Treaty, operate
through their National Antarctic Program a number of seasonal-only
(summer) and year-round research stations on the continent and its
nearby islands south of 60 degrees south latitude (the region
covered by the Antarctic Treaty); the population doing and
supporting science or engaged in the management and protection of
the Antarctic region varies from approximately 4,400 in summer to
1,100 in winter; in addition, approximately 1,000 personnel,
including ship's crew and scientists doing onboard research, are
present in the waters of the treaty region; peak summer
(December-February) population - 4,490 total; Argentina 667,
Australia 200, Australia and Romania jointly 13, Belgium 20, Brazil
40, Bulgaria 18, Chile 359, China 90, Czech Republic 20, Ecuador 26,
Finland 20, France 125, France and Italy jointly 60, Germany 90,
India 65, Italy 102, Japan 125, South Korea 70, NZ 85, Norway 44,
Peru 28, Poland 40, Russia 429, South Africa 80, Spain 50, Sweden
20, Ukraine 24, UK 217, US 1,293, Uruguay 70 (2008-2009); winter
(June-August) station population - 1,106 total; Argentina 176,
Australia 62, Brazil 12, Chile 114, China 29, France 26, France and
Italy jointly 13, Germany 9, India 25, Japan 40, South Korea 18, NZ
10, Norway 7, Poland 12, Russia 148, South Africa 10, Ukraine 12, UK
37, US 337, Uruguay 9 (2009); research stations operated within the
Antarctic Treaty area (south of 60 degrees south latitude) by
National Antarctic Programs: year-round stations - 40 total;
Argentina 6, Australia 3, Brazil 1, Chile 6, China 2, France 1,
France and Italy jointly 1, Germany 1, India 1, Japan 1, South Korea
1, NZ 1, Norway 1, Poland 1, Russia 5, South Africa 1, Ukraine 1, UK
2, US 3, Uruguay 1 (2009); a range of seasonal-only (summer)
stations, camps, and refuges - Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland,
France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, Poland, Romania (with Australia), Russia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, UK, US, and Uruguay (2008-2009); in
addition, during the austral summer some nations have numerous
occupied locations such as tent camps, summer-long temporary
facilities, and mobile traverses in support of research (May 2009
est.)







Government ::Antarctica




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Antarctica



Government type:


Antarctic Treaty Summary - the Antarctic region is governed by a
system known as the Antarctic Treaty System; the system includes: 1.
the Antarctic Treaty, signed on 1 December 1959 and entered into
force on 23 June 1961, which establishes the legal framework for the
management of Antarctica, 2. Recommendations and Measures adopted at
meetings of Antarctic Treaty countries, 3. The Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972), 4. The Convention for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980), and 5. The
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (1991);
the 33rd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was held in Punta del
Este, Uruguay in May 2010; at these periodic meetings, decisions are
made by consensus (not by vote) of all consultative member nations;
by April 2010, there were 48 treaty member nations: 28 consultative
and 20 non-consultative; consultative (decision-making) members
include the seven nations that claim portions of Antarctica as
national territory (some claims overlap) and 21 non-claimant
nations; the US and Russia have reserved the right to make claims;
the US does not recognize the claims of others; Antarctica is
administered through meetings of the consultative member nations;
decisions from these meetings are carried out by these member
nations (with respect to their own nationals and operations) in
accordance with their own national laws; the years in parentheses
indicate when a consultative member-nation acceded to the Treaty and
when it was accepted as a consultative member, while no date
indicates the country was an original 1959 treaty signatory;
claimant nations are - Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, NZ,
Norway, and the UK. Nonclaimant consultative nations are - Belgium,
Brazil (1975/1983), Bulgaria (1978/1998) China (1983/1985), Ecuador
(1987/1990), Finland (1984/1989), Germany (1979/1981), India
(1983/1983), Italy (1981/1987), Japan, South Korea (1986/1989),
Netherlands (1967/1990), Peru (1981/1989), Poland (1961/1977),
Russia, South Africa, Spain (1982/1988), Sweden (1984/1988), Ukraine
(1992/2004), Uruguay (1980/1985), and the US; non-consultative
members, with year of accession in parentheses, are - Austria
(1987), Belarus (2006), Canada (1988), Colombia (1989), Cuba (1984),
Czech Republic (1962/1993), Denmark (1965), Estonia (2001), Greece
(1987), Guatemala (1991), Hungary (1984), North Korea (1987), Monaco
(2008), Papua New Guinea (1981), Portugal (2010), Romania (1971),
Slovakia (1962/1993), Switzerland (1990), Turkey (1996), and
Venezuela (1999); note - Czechoslovakia acceded to the Treaty in
1962 and separated into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993;

claimant nations are - Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, NZ,
Norway, and the UK. Nonclaimant consultative nations are - Belgium,
Brazil (1975/1983), Bulgaria (1978/1998) China (1983/1985), Ecuador
(1987/1990), Finland (1984/1989), Germany (1979/1981), India
(1983/1983), Italy (1981/1987), Japan, South Korea (1986/1989),
Netherlands (1967/1990), Peru (1981/1989), Poland (1961/1977),
Russia, South Africa, Spain (1982/1988), Sweden (1984/1988), Ukraine
(1992/2004), Uruguay (1980/1985), and the US; non-consultative
members, with year of accession in parentheses, are - Austria
(1987), Belarus (2006), Canada (1988), Colombia (1989), Cuba (1984),
Czech Republic (1962/1993), Denmark (1965), Estonia (2001), Greece
(1987), Guatemala (1991), Hungary (1984), North Korea (1987), Monaco
(2008), Papua New Guinea (1981), Portugal (2010), Romania (1971),
Slovakia (1962/1993), Switzerland (1990), Turkey (1996), and
Venezuela (1999); note - Czechoslovakia acceded to the Treaty in
1962 and separated into the Czech Republic and Slovakia in 1993;

Article 1 - area to be used for peaceful purposes only; military
activity, such as weapons testing, is prohibited, but military
personnel and equipment may be used for scientific research or any
other peaceful purpose; Article 2 - freedom of scientific
investigation and cooperation shall continue; Article 3 - free
exchange of information and personnel, cooperation with the UN and
other international agencies; Article 4 - does not recognize,
dispute, or establish territorial claims and no new claims shall be
asserted while the treaty is in force; Article 5 - prohibits nuclear
explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes; Article 6 - includes
under the treaty all land and ice shelves south of 60 degrees 00
minutes south and reserves high seas rights; Article 7 -
treaty-state observers have free access, including aerial
observation, to any area and may inspect all stations,
installations, and equipment; advance notice of all expeditions and
of the introduction of military personnel must be given; Article 8 -
allows for jurisdiction over observers and scientists by their own
states; Article 9 - frequent consultative meetings take place among
member nations; Article 10 - treaty states will discourage
activities by any country in Antarctica that are contrary to the
treaty; Article 11 - disputes to be settled peacefully by the
parties concerned or, ultimately, by the ICJ; Articles 12, 13, 14 -
deal with upholding, interpreting, and amending the treaty among
involved nations; other agreements - some 200 recommendations
adopted at treaty consultative meetings and ratified by governments;
a mineral resources agreement was signed in 1988 but remains
unratified; the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty was signed 4 October 1991 and entered into force 14
January 1998; this agreement provides for the protection of the
Antarctic environment through six specific annexes: 1) environmental
impact assessment, 2) conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, 3)
waste disposal and waste management, 4) prevention of marine
pollution, 5) area protection and management and 6) liability
arising from environmental emergencies; it prohibits all activities
relating to mineral resources except scientific research; a
permanent Antarctic Treaty Secretariat was established in 2004 in
Buenos Aires, Argentina



Legal system:


Antarctica is administered through annual meetings - known as
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings - which include consultative
member nations, non-consultative member nations, observer
organizations, and expert organizations; decisions from these
meetings are carried out by these member nations (with respect to
their own nationals and operations) in accordance with their own
national laws; more generally, access to the Antarctic Treaty area,
that is to all areas between 60 and 90 degrees south latitude, is
subject to a number of relevant legal instruments and authorization
procedures adopted by the states party to the Antarctic Treaty; note
- US law, including certain criminal offenses by or against US
nationals, such as murder, may apply extraterritorially; some US
laws directly apply to Antarctica; for example, the Antarctic
Conservation Act, 16 U.S.C. section 2401 et seq., provides civil and
criminal penalties for the following activities unless authorized by
regulation of statute: the taking of native mammals or birds; the
introduction of nonindigenous plants and animals; entry into
specially protected areas; the discharge or disposal of pollutants;
and the importation into the US of certain items from Antarctica;
violation of the Antarctic Conservation Act carries penalties of up
to $10,000 in fines and one year in prison; the National Science
Foundation and Department of Justice share enforcement
responsibilities; Public Law 95-541, the US Antarctic Conservation
Act of 1978, as amended in 1996, requires expeditions from the US to
Antarctica to notify, in advance, the Office of Oceans, Room 5805,
Department of State, Washington, DC 20520, which reports such plans
to other nations as required by the Antarctic Treaty; for more
information, contact Permit Office, Office of Polar Programs,
National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia 22230; telephone:
(703) 292-8030, or visit its website at www.nsf.gov







Economy ::Antarctica




Economy - overview:


Scientific undertakings rather than commercial pursuits are the
predominate human activity in Antarctica. Fishing off the coast and
tourism, both based abroad, account for Antarctica's limited
economic activity. Antarctic fisheries, targeting three main species
- Patagonian and Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and
D. mawsoni), mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), and krill
(Euphausia superba) - reported landing 141,147 metric tons in
2008-09 (1 July - 30 June). (Estimated fishing is from the area
covered by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources (CCAMLR), which extends slightly beyond the
Antarctic Treaty area.) Unregulated fishing, particularly of
Patagonian toothfish (also known as Chilean sea bass), is a serious
problem. The CCAMLR determines the recommended catch limits for
marine species. A total of 37,858 tourists visited the Antarctic
Treaty area in the 2008-09 Antarctic summer, down from the 46,265
visitors in 2007-2008 (estimates provided to the Antarctic Treaty by
the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators (IAATO);
this does not include passengers on overflights). Nearly all of them
were passengers on commercial (nongovernmental) ships and several
yachts that make trips during the summer.







Communications ::Antarctica




Telephones - main lines in use:


0; note - information for US bases only (2001)
country comparison to the world: 231


Telephone system:


general assessment: local systems at some research stations

domestic: commercial cellular networks operating in a small number
of locations

international: country code - none allocated; via satellite
(including mobile Inmarsat and Iridium systems) to and from all
research stations, ships, aircraft, and most field parties (2007)



Internet country code:


.aq



Internet hosts:


7,765 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 135






Transportation ::Antarctica




Airports:


26 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 126


Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 26

over 3,047 m: 5

2,438 to 3,047 m: 5

1,524 to 2,437 m: 1

914 to 1,523 m: 9

under 914 m: 6 (2010)



Heliports:


53

note: all year-round and seasonal stations operated by National
Antarctic Programs stations have some kind of helicopter landing
facilities, prepared (helipads) or unprepared (2010)



Ports and terminals:


McMurdo Station; most coastal stations have sparse and intermittent
offshore anchorages; a few stations have basic wharf facilities



Transportation - note:


US coastal stations include McMurdo (77 51 S, 166 40 E) and Palmer
(64 43 S, 64 03 W); government use only except by permit (see Permit
Office under "Legal System"); all ships at port are subject to
inspection in accordance with Article 7, Antarctic Treaty; relevant
legal instruments and authorization procedures adopted by the states
parties to the Antarctic Treaty regulating access to the Antarctic
Treaty area to all areas between 60 and 90 degrees of latitude south
have to be complied with (see "Legal System"); The Hydrographic
Commission on Antarctica (HCA), a commission of the International
Hydrographic Organization (IHO), is responsible for hydrographic
surveying and nautical charting matters in Antarctic Treaty area; it
coordinates and facilitates provision of accurate and appropriate
charts and other aids to navigation in support of safety of
navigation in region; membership of HCA is open to any IHO Member
State whose government has acceded to the Antarctic Treaty and which
contributes resources or data to IHO Chart coverage of the area







Military ::Antarctica




Military - note:


the Antarctic Treaty prohibits any measures of a military nature,
such as the establishment of military bases and fortifications, the
carrying out of military maneuvers, or the testing of any type of
weapon; it permits the use of military personnel or equipment for
scientific research or for any other peaceful purposes







Transnational Issues ::Antarctica




Disputes - international:


the Antarctic Treaty freezes, and most states do not recognize, the
land and maritime territorial claims made by Argentina, Australia,
Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway, and the United Kingdom (some
overlapping) for three-fourths of the continent; the US and Russia
reserve the right to make claims; no formal claims have been made in
the sector between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west; the
International Whaling Commission created a sanctuary around the
entire continent to deter catches by countries claiming to conduct
scientific whaling; Australia has established a similar preserve in
the waters around its territorial claim









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





