Arctic Ocean  (Oceans)

Introduction ::Arctic Ocean




Background:


The Arctic Ocean is the smallest of the world's five oceans (after
the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, and the recently
delimited Southern Ocean). The Northwest Passage (US and Canada) and
Northern Sea Route (Norway and Russia) are two important seasonal
waterways. In recent years the polar ice pack has thinned allowing
for increased navigation and raising the possibility of future
sovereignty and shipping disputes among countries bordering the
Arctic Ocean.







Geography ::Arctic Ocean




Location:


body of water between Europe, Asia, and North America, mostly north
of the Arctic Circle



Geographic coordinates:


90 00 N, 0 00 E



Map references:


Arctic



Area:


total: 14.056 million sq km

note: includes Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea,
East Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara
Sea, Laptev Sea, Northwest Passage, and other tributary water bodies



Area - comparative:


slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US



Coastline:


45,389 km



Climate:


polar climate characterized by persistent cold and relatively narrow
annual temperature ranges; winters characterized by continuous
darkness, cold and stable weather conditions, and clear skies;
summers characterized by continuous daylight, damp and foggy
weather, and weak cyclones with rain or snow



Terrain:


central surface covered by a perennial drifting polar icepack that,
on average, is about 3 meters thick, although pressure ridges may be
three times that thickness; clockwise drift pattern in the Beaufort
Gyral Stream, but nearly straight-line movement from the New
Siberian Islands (Russia) to Denmark Strait (between Greenland and
Iceland); the icepack is surrounded by open seas during the summer,
but more than doubles in size during the winter and extends to the
encircling landmasses; the ocean floor is about 50% continental
shelf (highest percentage of any ocean) with the remainder a central
basin interrupted by three submarine ridges (Alpha Cordillera,
Nansen Cordillera, and Lomonosov Ridge)



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Fram Basin -4,665 m

highest point: sea level 0 m



Natural resources:


sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules,
oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals and whales)



Natural hazards:


ice islands occasionally break away from northern Ellesmere Island;
icebergs calved from glaciers in western Greenland and extreme
northeastern Canada; permafrost in islands; virtually ice locked
from October to June; ships subject to superstructure icing from
October to May



Environment - current issues:


endangered marine species include walruses and whales; fragile
ecosystem slow to change and slow to recover from disruptions or
damage; thinning polar icepack



Geography - note:


major chokepoint is the southern Chukchi Sea (northern access to the
Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait); strategic location between
North America and Russia; shortest marine link between the extremes
of eastern and western Russia; floating research stations operated
by the US and Russia; maximum snow cover in March or April about 20
to 50 centimeters over the frozen ocean; snow cover lasts about 10
months









Economy ::Arctic Ocean




Economy - overview:


Economic activity is limited to the exploitation of natural
resources, including petroleum, natural gas, fish, and seals.








Transportation ::Arctic Ocean




Ports and terminals:


Churchill (Canada), Murmansk (Russia), Prudhoe Bay (US)



Transportation - note:


sparse network of air, ocean, river, and land routes; the Northwest
Passage (North America) and Northern Sea Route (Eurasia) are
important seasonal waterways








Transnational Issues ::Arctic Ocean




Disputes - international:


the littoral states are engaged in various stages of demonstrating
the limits of their continental shelves beyond 200 nautical miles
from their declared baselines in accordance with Article 76,
paragraph 8, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea;
record summer melting of sea ice in the Arctic has restimulated
interest in maritime shipping lanes and sea floor exploration









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





