British Indian Ocean Territory  (South Asia)

Introduction ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Background:


Formerly administered as part of the British Crown Colony of
Mauritius, the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) was established
as an overseas territory of the UK in 1965. A number of the islands
of the territory were later transferred to the Seychelles when it
attained independence in 1976. Subsequently, BIOT has consisted only
of the six main island groups comprising the Chagos Archipelago. The
largest and most southerly of the islands, Diego Garcia, contains a
joint UK-US naval support facility. All of the remaining islands are
uninhabited. Between 1967 and 1973, former agricultural workers,
earlier residents in the islands, were relocated primarily to
Mauritius, but also to the Seychelles. Negotiations between 1971 and
1982 resulted in the establishment of a trust fund by the British
Government as compensation for the displaced islanders, known as
Chagossians. Beginning in 1998, the islanders pursued a series of
lawsuits against the British Government seeking further compensation
and the right to return to the territory. In 2006 and 2007, British
court rulings invalidated the immigration policies contained in the
2004 BIOT Constitution Order that had excluded the islanders from
the archipelago, but upheld the special military status of Diego
Garcia. In 2008, the House of Lords, as the final court of appeal in
the UK, ruled in favor of the British Government by overturning the
lower court rulings and finding no right of return for the
Chagossians.







Geography ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Location:


archipelago in the Indian Ocean, south of India, about halfway
between Africa and Indonesia



Geographic coordinates:


6 00 S, 71 30 E; note - Diego Garcia 7 20 S, 72 25 E



Map references:


Political Map of the World



Area:


total: 54,400 sq km
country comparison to the world: 127
land: 60 sq km; Diego Garcia 44 sq km

water: 54,340 sq km

note: includes the entire Chagos Archipelago of 55 islands



Area - comparative:


land area is about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


698 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 3 nm

exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical marine; hot, humid, moderated by trade winds



Terrain:


flat and low (most areas do not exceed two meters in elevation)



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point: unnamed location on Diego Garcia 15 m



Natural resources:


coconuts, fish, sugarcane



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Irrigated land:


0 sq km



Natural hazards:


NA



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


archipelago of 55 islands; Diego Garcia, largest and southernmost
island, occupies strategic location in central Indian Ocean; island
is site of joint US-UK military facility







People ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

note: approximately 1,200 former agricultural workers resident in
the Chagos Archipelago, often referred to as Chagossians or Ilois,
were relocated to Mauritius and the Seychelles in the 1960s and
1970s; in November 2004, approximately 4,000 UK and US military
personnel and civilian contractors were living on the island of
Diego Garcia







Government ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Country name:


conventional long form: British Indian Ocean Territory

conventional short form: none

abbreviation: BIOT



Dependency status:


overseas territory of the UK; administered by a commissioner,
resident in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London



Legal system:


the laws of the UK where applicable apply



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)

head of government: Commissioner Colin ROBERTS (since July 2008);
Administrator Joanne YEADON (since December 2007); note - both
reside in the UK and are represented by the officer commanding
British Forces on Diego Garcia

cabinet: NA
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: none; the monarchy is hereditary; commissioner and
administrator appointed by the monarch



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Flag description:


white with six blue wavy horizontal stripes; the flag of the UK is
in the upper hoist-side quadrant; the striped section bears a palm
tree and yellow crown (the symbols of the territory) centered on the
outer half of the flag; the wavy stripes represent the Indian Ocean;
although not officially described, the six blue stripes may stand
for the six main atolls of the archipelago







Economy ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Economy - overview:


All economic activity is concentrated on the largest island of Diego
Garcia, where a joint UK-US military facility is located.
Construction projects and various services needed to support the
military installation are performed by military and contract
employees from the UK, Mauritius, the Philippines, and the US. There
are no industrial or agricultural activities on the islands. The
territory earns foreign exchange by selling fishing licenses and
postage stamps.



Electricity - production:


NA kWh; note - electricity supplied by the US military



Electricity - consumption:


NA kWh



Exchange rates:


the US dollar is used







Communications ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Telephones - main lines in use:


NA



Telephone system:


general assessment: separate facilities for military and public
needs are available

domestic: all commercial telephone services are available, including
connection to the Internet

international: country code (Diego Garcia) - 246; international
telephone service is carried by satellite (2000)



Broadcast media:


Armed Forces Radio and Television Service (AFRTS) broadcasts over 3
separate frequencies for US and UK military personnel stationed on
the islands (2009)



Internet country code:


.io



Internet hosts:


827 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 169






Transportation ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 232


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

over 3,047 m: 1 (2010)



Roadways:


note: short section of paved road between port and airfield on Diego
Garcia



Ports and terminals:


Diego Garcia







Military ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Military branches:


no regular military forces



Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the UK; the US lease on Diego
Garcia expires in 2016







Transnational Issues ::British Indian Ocean Territory




Disputes - international:


Mauritius claims the Chagos Archipelago including Diego Garcia; in
2001, the former inhabitants of the Chagos Archipelago, evicted in
1967 and 1973 and now residing chiefly in Mauritius, were granted UK
citizenship and the right to repatriation; in May 2007, the UK Court
of Appeals upheld the May 2006 High Court of London judgment
reversing the UK government's 2004 Orders of Council that banned
habitation on the islands; a small group of Chagossians visited
Diego Garcia in April 2006; repatriation is complicated by the
exclusive US military lease of Diego Garcia that restricts access to
the largest viable island in the chain









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





