Christmas Island  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Christmas Island




Background:


Named in 1643 for the day of its discovery, the island was annexed
and settlement began by the UK in 1888. Phosphate mining began in
the 1890s. The UK transferred sovereignty to Australia in 1958.
Almost two-thirds of the island has been declared a national park.







Geography ::Christmas Island




Location:


Southeastern Asia, island in the Indian Ocean, south of Indonesia



Geographic coordinates:


10 30 S, 105 40 E



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 135 sq km
country comparison to the world: 221
land: 135 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


about three-quarters the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


138.9 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

contiguous zone: 12 nm

exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical with a wet season (December to April) and dry season; heat
and humidity moderated by trade winds



Terrain:


steep cliffs along coast rise abruptly to central plateau



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point: Murray Hill 361 m



Natural resources:


phosphate, beaches



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (mainly tropical rainforest; 63% of the island is a
national park) (2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island can be a maritime
hazard



Environment - current issues:


loss of rainforest; impact of phosphate mining



Geography - note:


located along major sea lanes of Indian Ocean







People ::Christmas Island




Population:


1,402 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 233


Age structure:


0-14 years: NA

15-64 years: NA

65 years and over: NA



Population growth rate:


0% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 196


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Sex ratio:


NA (2009 est.)



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Christmas Islander(s)

adjective: Christmas Island



Ethnic groups:


Chinese 70%, European 20%, Malay 10%

note: no indigenous population (2001)



Religions:


Buddhist 36%, Muslim 25%, Christian 18%, other 21% (1997)



Languages:


English (official), Chinese, Malay



Literacy:


NA







Government ::Christmas Island




Country name:


conventional long form: Territory of Christmas Island

conventional short form: Christmas Island



Dependency status:


non-self governing territory of Australia; administered from
Canberra by the Australian Government Attorney-General's Department



Government type:


NA



Capital:


name: The Settlement

geographic coordinates: 10 25 S, 105 43 E

time difference: UTC+7 (12 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)



Administrative divisions:


none (territory of Australia)



Independence:


none (territory of Australia)



National holiday:


Australia Day, 26 January (1788)



Constitution:


Christmas Island Act of 1958-59 (1 October 1958) as amended by the
Territories Law Reform Act of 1992



Legal system:


under the authority of the governor general of Australia and
Australian law



Suffrage:


18 years of age



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
represented by the Australian governor general

head of government: Administrator Brian LACY (since 5 October 2009)

elections: the monarchy is hereditary; administrator appointed by
the governor general of Australia and represents the monarch and
Australia



Legislative branch:


unicameral Christmas Island Shire Council (9 seats; members elected
by popular vote to serve four-year terms)

elections: held every two years with half the members standing for
election; last held on 17 October 2009 (next to be held in 2011)

election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 9



Judicial branch:


Supreme Court; District Court; Magistrate's Court



Political parties and leaders:


none



Political pressure groups and leaders:


none



International organization participation:


none



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (territory of Australia)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (territory of Australia)



Flag description:


territorial flag; divided diagonally from upper hoist to lower fly;
the upper triangle is green with a yellow image of the Golden Bosun
Bird superimposed, the lower triangle is blue with the Southern
Cross constellation, representing Australia, superimposed; a
centered yellow disk displays a green map of the island

note: the flag of Australia is used for official purposes



National anthem:


note: as a territory of Australia, "Advance Australia Fair" remains
official as the national anthem, while "God Save the Queen" serves
as the royal anthem (see Australia)







Economy ::Christmas Island




Economy - overview:


Phosphate mining had been the only significant economic activity,
but in December 1987 the Australian government closed the mine. In
1991, the mine was reopened. With the support of the government, a
$34 million casino opened in 1993, but closed in 1998.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$NA



Labor force:


NA



Agriculture - products:


NA



Industries:


tourism, phosphate extraction (near depletion)



Exports:


$NA



Exports - commodities:


phosphate



Imports:


$NA



Imports - commodities:


consumer goods



Exchange rates:


Australian dollars (AUD) per US dollar - 1.1151 (2010), 1.2822
(2009), 1.2059 (2008), 1.2137 (2007), 1.3285 (2006)







Communications ::Christmas Island




Telephones - main lines in use:


NA



Telephone system:


general assessment: service provided by the Australian network

domestic: GSM mobile-cellular telephone service replaced older
analog system in February 2005

international: country code - 61-8; satellite earth station - 1
(Intelsat provides telephone and telex service) (2005)



Broadcast media:


1 community radio station; broadcasts of several Australian radio
and television stations are received via satellite (2009)



Internet country code:


.cx



Internet hosts:


2,542 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 149


Internet users:


464 (2001)
country comparison to the world: 216






Transportation ::Christmas Island




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 235


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (2010)



Railways:


total: 18 km
country comparison to the world: 133
standard gauge: 18 km 1.435-m (not in operation) (2010)



Roadways:


total: 140 km
country comparison to the world: 210
paved: 30 km

unpaved: 110 km (2007)



Ports and terminals:


Flying Fish Cove







Military ::Christmas Island




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of Australia







Transnational Issues ::Christmas Island




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





