Cocos (Keeling) Islands  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Background:


There are 27 coral islands in the group. Captain William KEELING
discovered the islands in 1609, but they remained uninhabited until
the 19th century. From the 1820s to 1978, members of the CLUNIE-ROSS
family controlled the islands and the copra produced from local
coconuts. Annexed by the UK in 1857, the Cocos Islands were
transferred to the Australian Government in 1955. The population on
the two inhabited islands generally is split between the ethnic
Europeans on West Island and the ethnic Malays on Home Island.







Geography ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Location:


Southeastern Asia, group of islands in the Indian Ocean, southwest
of Indonesia, about halfway from Australia to Sri Lanka



Geographic coordinates:


12 30 S, 96 50 E



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 14 sq km
country comparison to the world: 240
land: 14 sq km

water: 0 sq km

note: includes the two main islands of West Island and Home Island



Area - comparative:


about 24 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


26 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical with high humidity, moderated by the southeast trade winds
for about nine months of the year



Terrain:


flat, low-lying coral atolls



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point: unnamed location 5 m



Natural resources:


fish



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


cyclone season is October to April



Environment - current issues:


fresh water resources are limited to rainwater accumulations in
natural underground reservoirs



Geography - note:


islands are thickly covered with coconut palms and other vegetation;
site of a World War I naval battle in November 1914 between the
Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney and the German raider SMS
Emden; after being heavily damaged in the engagement, the Emden was
beached by her captain on North Keeling Island







People ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Population:


596 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 237


Age structure:


0-14 years: NA

15-64 years: NA

65 years and over: NA



Population growth rate:


0% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 197


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Cocos Islander(s)

adjective: Cocos Islander



Ethnic groups:


Europeans, Cocos Malays



Religions:


Sunni Muslim 80%, other 20% (2002 est.)



Languages:


Malay (Cocos dialect), English



Literacy:


NA







Government ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Country name:


conventional long form: Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands

conventional short form: Cocos (Keeling) Islands



Dependency status:


non-self governing territory of Australia; administered from
Canberra by the Australian Government Attorney-General's Department



Government type:


NA



Capital:


name: West Island

geographic coordinates: 12 10 S, 96 50 E

time difference: UTC+6.5 (11.5 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)



Administrative divisions:


none (territory of Australia)



Independence:


none (territory of Australia)



National holiday:


Australia Day, 26 January (1788)



Constitution:


Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act of 1955 (23 November 1955) as amended by
the Territories Law Reform Act of 1992



Legal system:


based upon the laws of Australia and local laws



Suffrage:


18 years of age



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952);
represented by the Australian governor general

head of government: Administrator (nonresident) Brian LACY (since 5
October 2009)

cabinet: NA
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the monarchy is hereditary; administrator appointed by
the governor general of Australia and represents the monarch and
Australia



Legislative branch:


unicameral Cocos (Keeling) Islands Shire Council (7 seats)

elections: held every two years with half the members standing for
election; last held in May 2007 (next to be held in May 2009)



Judicial branch:


Supreme Court; Magistrate's Court



Political parties and leaders:


none



Political pressure groups and leaders:


The Cocos Islands Youth Support Centre



International organization participation:


none



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (territory of Australia)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (territory of Australia)



Flag description:


the flag of Australia is used



National anthem:


note: as a territory of Australia, "Advance Australia Fair" remains
official as the national anthem, while "God Save the Queen" serves
as the royal anthem (see Australia)







Economy ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Economy - overview:


Coconuts, grown throughout the islands, are the sole cash crop.
Small local gardens and fishing contribute to the food supply, but
additional food and most other necessities must be imported from
Australia. There is a small tourist industry.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$NA



Labor force:


NA



Labor force - by occupation:


note: the Cocos Islands Cooperative Society Ltd. employs
construction workers, stevedores, and lighterage workers; tourism
employs others



Unemployment rate:


60% (2000 est.)
country comparison to the world: 195


Agriculture - products:


vegetables, bananas, pawpaws, coconuts



Industries:


copra products and tourism



Exports:


$NA



Exports - commodities:


copra



Imports:


$NA



Imports - commodities:


foodstuffs



Exchange rates:


Australian dollars (AUD) per US dollar - 1.1151 (2010), 1.2822
(2009), 1.2059 (2008), 1.2137 (2007), 1.3285 (2006)







Communications ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Telephones - main lines in use:


287 (1992)
country comparison to the world: 229


Telephone system:


general assessment: connected within Australia's telecommunication
system; a local mobile-cellular network is in operation

domestic: NA

international: country code - 61; telephone, telex, and facsimile
communications with Australia and elsewhere via satellite; satellite
earth station - 1 (Intelsat) (2001)



Broadcast media:


1 local radio station staffed by community volunteers; broadcasts of
several Australian radio and TV stations are received via satellite
(2009)



Internet country code:


.cc



Internet hosts:


35,312 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 96






Transportation ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 234


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (2010)



Roadways:


total: 22 km
country comparison to the world: 220
paved: 10 km

unpaved: 12 km (2007)



Ports and terminals:


Port Refuge







Military ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of Australia; the territory has a
five-person police force







Transnational Issues ::Cocos (Keeling) Islands




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





