Dhekelia  (Europe)

Introduction ::Dhekelia




Background:


By terms of the 1960 Treaty of Establishment that created the
independent Republic of Cyprus, the UK retained full sovereignty and
jurisdiction over two areas of almost 254 square kilometers -
Akrotiri and Dhekelia. The larger of these is the Dhekelia Sovereign
Base Area, which is also referred to as the Eastern Sovereign Base
Area.







Geography ::Dhekelia




Location:


Eastern Mediterranean, on the southeast coast of Cyprus near
Famagusta



Geographic coordinates:


34 59 N, 33 45 E



Map references:


Europe



Area:


total: 130.8 sq km
country comparison to the world: 222
note: area surrounds three Cypriot enclaves



Area - comparative:


about three-quarters the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


total: 103 km (approximately)

border countries: Cyprus 103 km (approximately)



Coastline:


27.5 km



Climate:


temperate; Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and cool winters



Environment - current issues:


netting and trapping of small migrant songbirds in the spring and
autumn



Geography - note:


British extraterritorial rights also extended to several small
off-post sites scattered across Cyprus; of the Sovereign Base Area
land 60% is privately owned and farmed, 20% is owned by the Ministry
of Defense, and 20% is SBA Crown land







People ::Dhekelia




Population:


approximately 15,700 live on the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri
and Dhekelia including 7,700 Cypriots, 3,600 service and UK based
contract personnel, and 4,400 dependents
country comparison to the world: 220


Languages:


English, Greek







Government ::Dhekelia




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Dhekelia



Dependency status:


a special form of UK overseas territory; administered by an
administrator who is also the Commander, British Forces Cyprus



Capital:


name: Episkopi Cantonment (base administrative center for Akrotiri
and Dhekelia); located in Akrotiri

geographic coordinates: 34 40 N, 32 51 E

time difference: UTC+2 (7 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins last Sunday in March; ends last
Sunday in October



Constitution:


Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia Order in Council 1960,
effective 16 August 1960, functions as a basic legal document



Legal system:


the Sovereign Base Area Administration has its own court system to
deal with civil and criminal matters; laws applicable to the Cypriot
population are, as far as possible, the same as the laws of the
Republic of Cyprus



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)

head of government: Administrator Major General Jamie GORDON (since
October 2008); note - reports to the British Ministry of Defense

elections: none; the monarchy is hereditary; the administrator
appointed by the monarch



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Flag description:


the flag of the UK is used



National anthem:


note: as a United Kingdom area of special sovereignty,"God Save the
Queen" is official (see United Kingdom)







Economy ::Dhekelia




Economy - overview:


Economic activity is limited to providing services to the military
and their families located in Dhekelia. All food and manufactured
goods must be imported.



Industries:


none



Exchange rates:


euros (EUR) per US dollar - 0.7715 (2010), 0.7338 (2009), 0.6827
(2008)

note: on 1 January 2008, Dhekelia and Akrotiri adopted the euro
along with the rest of Cyprus







Communications ::Dhekelia




Broadcast media:


British Forces Broadcast Service (BFBS) provides multi-channel
satellite TV service as well as BFBS radio broadcasts to the
Dhekelia Sovereign Base (2009)








Military ::Dhekelia




Military - note:


includes Dhekelia Garrison and Ayios Nikolaos Station connected by a
roadway










page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





