European Union  (Europe)

Introduction ::European Union




Preliminary statement:


The evolution of the European Union (EU) from a regional economic
agreement among six neighboring states in 1951 to today's
supranational organization of 27 countries across the European
continent stands as an unprecedented phenomenon in the annals of
history. Dynastic unions for territorial consolidation were long the
norm in Europe. On a few occasions even country-level unions were
arranged - the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and the
Austro-Hungarian Empire were examples - but for such a large number
of nation-states to cede some of their sovereignty to an overarching
entity is truly unique.

Although the EU is not a federation in the strict sense, it is far
more than a free-trade association such as ASEAN, NAFTA, or
Mercosur, and it has many of the attributes associated with
independent nations: its own flag, anthem, founding date, and
currency, as well as an incipient common foreign and security policy
in its dealings with other nations.

In the future, many of these nation-like characteristics are likely
to be expanded. Thus, inclusion of basic intelligence on the EU has
been deemed appropriate as a new, separate entity in The World
Factbook. However, because of the EU's special status, this
description is placed after the regular country entries.



Background:


Following the two devastating World Wars in the first half of the
20th century, a number of European leaders in the late 1940s became
convinced that the only way to establish a lasting peace was to
unite the two chief belligerent nations - France and Germany - both
economically and politically. In 1950, the French Foreign Minister
Robert SCHUMAN proposed an eventual union of all Europe, the first
step of which would be the integration of the coal and steel
industries of Western Europe. The following year the European Coal
and Steel Community (ECSC) was set up when six members, Belgium,
France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands, signed
the Treaty of Paris.

The ECSC was so successful that within a few years the decision was
made to integrate other parts of the countries' economies. In 1957,
the Treaties of Rome created the European Economic Community (EEC)
and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), and the six
member states undertook to eliminate trade barriers among themselves
by forming a common market. In 1967, the institutions of all three
communities were formally merged into the European Community (EC),
creating a single Commission, a single Council of Ministers, and the
European Parliament. Members of the European Parliament were
initially selected by national parliaments, but in 1979 the first
direct elections were undertaken and they have been held every five
years since.

In 1973, the first enlargement of the EC took place with the
addition of Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. The 1980s saw
further membership expansion with Greece joining in 1981 and Spain
and Portugal in 1986. The 1992 Treaty of Maastricht laid the basis
for further forms of cooperation in foreign and defense policy, in
judicial and internal affairs, and in the creation of an economic
and monetary union - including a common currency. This further
integration created the European Union (EU). In 1995, Austria,
Finland, and Sweden joined the EU, raising the membership total to
15.

A new currency, the euro, was launched in world money markets on 1
January 1999; it became the unit of exchange for all of the EU
states except the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark. In 2002,
citizens of the 12 euro-area countries (the European Monetary Union
or EMU) began using the euro banknotes and coins. Ten new countries
joined the EU in 2004 - Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia -
and in 2007 Bulgaria and Romania joined, bringing the current
membership to 27. In order to ensure that the EU can continue to
function efficiently with an expanded membership, the Treaty of Nice
(in force as of 1 February 2003) set forth rules streamlining the
size and procedures of EU institutions. An effort to establish an EU
constitution, begun in October 2004, failed to attain unanimous
ratification. A new effort, undertaken in June 2007, created an
Intergovernmental Conference to formulate a political agreement -
initially known as the Reform Treaty but subsequently referred to as
the Treaty of Lisbon - which would serve as a constitution. Unlike
the constitution, however, the Treaty of Lisbon sought to amend
existing treaties rather than replace them. In October 2009, an
Irish referendum approved the Treaty (overturning a previous
rejection) and cleared the way for an ultimate unanimous endorsement
- the Czech Republic signed on soon after. Treaty implementation
began on 1 December 2009. In 2010, the prospect of a Greek default
on its euro-denominated debt created severe strains within the EMU
and raised the question of whether a member country might be removed.







Geography ::European Union




Location:


Europe between the North Atlantic Ocean in the west and Russia,
Belarus, and Ukraine to the east



Map references:


Europe



Area:


total: 4,324,782 sq km



Area - comparative:


less than one-half the size of the US



Land boundaries:


total: 12,440.8 km

border countries: Albania 282 km, Andorra 120.3 km, Belarus 1,050
km, Croatia 999 km, Holy See 3.2 km, Liechtenstein 34.9 km,
Macedonia 394 km, Moldova 450 km, Monaco 4.4 km, Norway 2,348 km,
Russia 2,257 km, San Marino 39 km, Serbia 945 km, Switzerland 1,811
km, Turkey 446 km, Ukraine 1,257 km

note: data for European Continent only



Coastline:


65,992.9 km



Maritime claims:


NA



Climate:


cold temperate; potentially subarctic in the north to temperate;
mild wet winters; hot dry summers in the south



Terrain:


fairly flat along the Baltic and Atlantic coast; mountainous in the
central and southern areas



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Lammefjord, Denmark -7 m; Zuidplaspolder, Netherlands
-7 m

highest point: Mont Blanc 4,807 m; note - situated on the border
between France and Italy



Natural resources:


iron ore, natural gas, petroleum, coal, copper, lead, zinc, bauxite,
uranium, potash, salt, hydropower, arable land, timber, fish



Land use:


arable land: NA

permanent crops: NA

other: NA



Irrigated land:


168,050 sq km (2003 est.)



Natural hazards:


flooding along coasts; avalanches in mountainous area; earthquakes
in the south; volcanic eruptions in Italy; periodic droughts in
Spain; ice floes in the Baltic



Environment - current issues:


NA



Environment - international agreements:


party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes,
Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
Timber 94

signed but not ratified: Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds







People ::European Union




Population:


492,387,344 (July 2010 est.)



Age structure:


0-14 years: 15.44% (male 38,992,677/female 36,940,450)

15-64 years: 67.23% (male 166,412,403/female 164,295,636)

65 years and over: 17.33% (male 35,376,333/female 49,853,361) (2009
est.)



Median age:


note - see individual country entries of member states (2009 est.)



Population growth rate:


0.098 % (2010 est.)



Birth rate:


9.83 births/1,000 population (2010 est.)



Death rate:


10.33 deaths/1,000 population (July 2010 est.)



Net migration rate:


1.48 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2010 est.)



Sex ratio:


at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female

15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female

65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female

total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (2009 est.)



Infant mortality rate:


total: 5.61 deaths/1,000 live births
country comparison to the world: 181
male: 6.26 deaths/1,000 live births

female: 4.93 deaths/1,000 live births (2010 est.)



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: 78.82 years
country comparison to the world: 41
male: 75.7 years

female: 82.13 years (2010 est.)



Total fertility rate:


1.51 children born/woman (2010 est.)



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


note - see individual country entries of member states



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


note - see individual country entries of member states



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


note - see individual country entries of member states



Religions:


Roman Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox, Muslim, Jewish



Languages:


Bulgarian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French,
Gaelic, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian,
Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovene, Spanish,
Swedish

note: only official languages are listed; German, the major language
of Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, is the most widely spoken
mother tongue - over 19% of the EU population; English is the most
widely spoken language - about 49% of the EU population is
conversant with it (2007)







Government ::European Union




Union name:


conventional long form: European Union

abbreviation: EU



Political structure:


a hybrid intergovernmental and supranational organization



Capital:


name: Brussels (Belgium), Strasbourg (France), Luxembourg

geographic coordinates: 50 50 N, 4 20 E

time difference: UTC+1 (6 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins last Sunday in March; ends last
Sunday in October

note: the Council of the European Union meets in Brussels, Belgium;
the European Parliament meets in Brussels and Strasbourg, France;
the Court of Justice of the European Communities meets in Luxembourg



Member states:


27 countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, UK;
note - candidate countries: Croatia, Iceland, Macedonia, Montenegro,
Turkey



Independence:


7 February 1992 (Maastricht Treaty signed establishing the EU); 1
November 1993 (Maastricht Treaty entered into force)



National holiday:


Europe Day 9 May (1950); note - a Union-wide holiday, the day that
Robert SCHUMAN proposed the creation of the European Coal and Steel
Community to achieve an organized Europe



Constitution:


none

note: based on a series of treaties: the Treaty of Paris, which set
up the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1951; the
Treaties of Rome, which set up the European Economic Community (EEC)
and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) in 1957; the
Single European Act in 1986; the Treaty on European Union
(Maastricht) in 1992; the Treaty of Amsterdam in 1997; and the
Treaty of Nice in 2003; note - a new draft Constitutional Treaty,
signed on 29 October 2004 in Rome, gave member states two years for
ratification either by parliamentary vote or national referendum
before it was scheduled to take effect on 1 November 2006; defeat in
French and Dutch referenda in May-June 2005 dealt a severe setback
to the ratification process; in June 2007, the European Council
agreed on a clear and concise mandate for an Intergovernmental
Conference to form a political agreement and put it into legal form;
this agreement, known as the Reform Treaty, would have served as a
constitution and was presented to the European Council in October
2007 for individual country ratification; it was rejected by Irish
voters in June 2008, again stalling the ratification process; the
Reform Treaty, more recently known as the Treaty of Lisbon, was
again circulated for ratification, and by November 2009 was approved
by all 27 countries; it came into effect on 1 December 2009



Legal system:


comparable to the legal systems of member states; first
supranational law system



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal



Executive branch:


chief of union: President of the European Commission Jose Manuel
BARROSO (since 2004)

cabinet: European Commission (composed of 27 members, one from each
member country; each commissioner responsible for one or more policy
areas)
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the president of the European Commission designated by
member governments and confirmed by the European Parliament; working
from member state recommendations, the Commission president then
assembles a "college" of Commission members; the European Parliament
confirms the entire Commission for a five-year term; the next
confirmation process will likely be held in January 2015

note: the European Council brings together heads of state and
government and the president of the European Commission and meets at
least four times a year; its aim is to provide the impetus for the
major political issues relating to European integration and to issue
general policy guidelines; leaders of the EU member states appointed
then Belgian Prime Minister Herman VAN ROMPUY to be the first
full-time president of the European Council in November 2009; he
took office on 1 December 2009 and will serve a
two-and-one-half-year term, renewable once; his core
responsibilities include chairing the four summits each year and
providing continuity beyond the rotating, six-month presidencies of
the Council of the EU



Legislative branch:


two legislative bodies consisting of the Council of the European
Union (27 member-state ministers having 345 votes; the number of
votes is roughly proportional to member-states' population) and the
European Parliament (736 seats; seats allocated among member states
in proportion to population; members elected by direct universal
suffrage for a five-year term); note - the Council is the main
decision-making body of the EU; leaders of the EU member states
appointed UK Baroness Catherine Ashton to be the first High
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy;
Ashton took office on 1 December 2009; her concurrent appointment as
Vice President of the European Commission - both of which are
subject to confirmation by the European Parliament - endows her
position with the policymaking influence of the Council of the EU
and the budgetary influence of the European Commission

elections: last held on 4-7 June 2009 (next to be held in June 2014)

election results: percent of vote - EPP 36%, S&D 25%, ALDE 11.4%,
Greens/EFA 7.5%, ECR 7.3%, GUE/NGL 4.8%, EFD 4.3%, independents
3.7%; seats by party - EPP 265, S&D 184, ALDE 84, Greens/EFA 55, ECR
54, GUE/NGL 35, EFD 32, independents 27



Judicial branch:


Court of Justice of the European Communities (ensures that the
treaties are interpreted and applied uniformly throughout the EU;
resolve constitutional issues among the EU institutions) - 27
justices (one from each member state) appointed for a six-year term;
note - for the sake of efficiency, the court can sit with 13
justices known as the "Grand Chamber"; Court of First Instance - 27
justices appointed for a six-year term



Political parties and leaders:


Confederal Group of the European United Left-Nordic Green Left or
GUE/NGL [Lothar BISKY]; Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group or EFD
[Nigel FARAGE and Francesco SPERONI]; European Conservatives and
Reformists Group or ECR [Michael KAMINSKI]; Group of Greens/European
Free Alliance or Greens/EFA [Rebecca HARMS and Daniel COHN-BENDIT];
Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe or ALDE
[Guy VERHOFSTADT]; Group of the European People's Party or EPP
[Joseph DAUL]; Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and
Democrats in the European Parliament or S&D [Martin SCHULZ]



International organization participation:


European Union: ARF (dialogue member), ASEAN (dialogue member), FAO,
G-8, G-20, IDA, OAS (observer), PIF (partner), SAARC (observer), UN
(observer), WTO

European Commission: Australian Group, CBSS, CERN, EBRD, FATF, G-10,
IEA, LAIA WTO, ZC (observer)

European Central Bank: BIS

European Investment Bank: EBRD



Diplomatic representation in the US:


chief of mission: Ambassador Joao P. Castanheira do VALE DE ALMEIDA

chancery: 2300 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20037

telephone: [1] (202) 862-9500

FAX: [1] (202) 429-1766



Diplomatic representation from the US:


chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Christopher
MURRAY

embassy: 13 Zinnerstraat/Rue Zinner, B-1000 Brussels

mailing address: same as above

telephone: [32] (2) 508-2111

FAX: [32] (2) 508-2063



Flag description:


a blue field with 12 five-pointed gold stars arranged in a circle in
the center; blue represents the sky of the Western world, the stars
are the peoples of Europe in a circle, a symbol of unity; the number
of stars is fixed



National anthem:


name: "Ode to Joy""

lyrics/music: none/Ludwig VON BEETHOVEN, arranged by Herbert VON
KARAJAN

note: adopted 1972, not in use until 1986; according to the European
Union, the song is meant to represent all of Europe rather than just
the organization; the song also serves as the anthem for the Council
of Europe







Economy ::European Union




Economy - overview:


Internally, the EU has abolished trade barriers, adopted a common
currency, and is striving toward convergence of living standards.
Internationally, the EU aims to bolster Europe's trade position and
its political and economic power. Because of the great differences
in per capita income among member states (from $7,000 to $78,000)
and in national attitudes toward issues like inflation, debt, and
foreign trade, the EU faces difficulties in devising and enforcing
common policies. In the wake of the global economic crisis, the
European Commission projected that the EU's economy would shrink by
4% in 2009 and 0.1% in 2010. The EU has recovered from the crisis
faster than expected, however, and the Commission estimates 2010
growth at 1.8%. Significant risks to growth nevertheless remain,
including, high official debts and deficits, aging populations,
over-regulation of non-financial businesses, and doubts about the
sustainability of European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). In
June 2010, prompted by the Greek financial crisis, the EU and the
IMF set up a $1 trillion bailout fund to rescue any EMU member in
danger of default, but it has not calmed market jitters that have
diminished the value of the euro. Eleven established EU member
states introduced the euro as their common currency on 1 January
1999 (Greece did so two years later), but the UK and Denmark have
'opt-outs' that allow them to keep their national currencies, and
Sweden has not taken the steps needed to participate. Between 2004
and 2007, the EU admitted 12 countries that are, in general, less
advanced economically than the other 15. Of the 12 most recent
member states, only Slovenia (1 January 2007), Cyprus and Malta (1
January 2008), Slovakia (1 January 2009), and Estonia (1 January
2011) have adopted the euro; the remaining states other than the UK
and Denmark are legally required to adopt the currency upon meeting
EU's fiscal and monetary convergence criteria.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$14.89 trillion (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 1
$14.64 trillion (2009 est.)

$15.27 trillion (2008 est.)

note: data are in 2010 US dollars



GDP (official exchange rate):


$15.9 trillion (2010 est.)



GDP - real growth rate:


1.7% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 160
-4% (2009 est.)

0.6% (2008 est.)



GDP - per capita (PPP):


$32,900 (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 42
$32,400 (2009 est.)

$33,900 (2008 est.)

note: data are in 2010 US dollars



GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: 1.8%

industry: 25.2%

services: 72.9% (2010 est.)



Labor force:


225.2 million (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 3


Labor force - by occupation:


agriculture: 5.6%

industry: 27.7%

services: 66.7% (2007 est.)



Unemployment rate:


9.5% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 104
9% (2009 est.)



Population below poverty line:


note - see individual country entries of member states



Household income or consumption by percentage share:


lowest 10%: 2.9%

highest 10%: 25.6% (2002 est.)



Distribution of family income - Gini index:


31 (2005 est.)
country comparison to the world: 106
31.2 (1996 est.)



Investment (gross fixed):


18.6% of GDP (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 103


Inflation rate (consumer prices):


1.7% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 47
1.8% (2009 est.)



Central bank discount rate:


1.75% (31 December 2009)
country comparison to the world: 121
3% (31 December 2008)

note: this is the European Central Bank's rate on the marginal
lending facility, which offers overnight credit to banks in the euro
area



Commercial bank prime lending rate:


7.52% (31 December 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 110
8.58% (31 December 2008 est.)



Stock of narrow money:


$5.542 trillion (31 December 2008)
country comparison to the world: 2
$5.649 trillion (31 December 2007)

note: this is the quantity of money, M1, for the euro area,
converted into US dollars at the exchange rate for the date
indicated; it excludes the stock of money carried by non-euro-area
members of the European Union



Stock of broad money:


$11.17 trillion (31 December 2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 4
$10.83 trillion (31 December 2007 est.)

note: this is the quantity of quasi money, M2-M1, for the euro area,
converted into US dollars at the exchange rate for the date
indicated; it excludes the stock of quasi money carried by
non-euro-area members of the European Union



Stock of domestic credit:


$22.65 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 2
$21.24 trillion (31 December 2008 est.)

note: this figure refers to the euro area only; it excludes credit
data for non-euro-area members of the EU



Market value of publicly traded shares:


$NA (31 December 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 2
$7.564 trillion (31 December 2008)

$15.57 trillion (31 December 2007 est.)



Agriculture - products:


wheat, barley, oilseeds, sugar beets, wine, grapes; dairy products,
cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry; fish



Industries:


among the world's largest and most technologically advanced, the EU
industrial base includes: ferrous and non-ferrous metal production
and processing, metal products, petroleum, coal, cement, chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, aerospace, rail transportation equipment, passenger
and commercial vehicles, construction equipment, industrial
equipment, shipbuilding, electrical power equipment, machine tools
and automated manufacturing systems, electronics and
telecommunications equipment, fishing, food and beverage processing,
furniture, paper, textiles, tourism



Industrial production growth rate:


3.8% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 90


Electricity - production:


3.08 trillion kWh (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 3


Electricity - consumption:


2.906 trillion kWh (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 3


Electricity - exports:


NA kWh



Electricity - imports:


NA kWh



Oil - production:


2.383 million bbl/day (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 13


Oil - consumption:


13.68 million bbl/day (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 2


Oil - exports:


2.196 million bbl/day (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 7


Oil - imports:


8.613 million bbl/day (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 2


Oil - proved reserves:


5.414 billion bbl (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 25


Natural gas - production:


181.6 billion cu m (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 4


Natural gas - consumption:


489.4 billion cu m (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 2


Natural gas - exports:


NA cu m



Natural gas - imports:


NA cu m



Natural gas - proved reserves:


2.242 trillion cu m (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 18


Current account balance:


$NA (2009)

$51.4 billion (2009 est.)



Exports:


$1.952 trillion (2007)
country comparison to the world: 1
$1.33 trillion (2005)

note: external exports, excluding intra-EU trade



Exports - commodities:


machinery, motor vehicles, aircraft, plastics, pharmaceuticals and
other chemicals, fuels, iron and steel, nonferrous metals, wood pulp
and paper products, textiles, meat, dairy products, fish, alcoholic
beverages.



Imports:


$1.69 trillion (2007)
country comparison to the world: 2
$1.466 trillion (2005)

note: external imports, excluding intra-EU trade



Imports - commodities:


machinery, vehicles, aircraft, plastics, crude oil, chemicals,
textiles, metals, foodstuffs, clothing



Reserves of foreign exchange and gold:


$NA



Debt - external:



country comparison to the world: 2
$13.72 trillion (30 June 2010); This is the external debt for the
euro area only; it excludes the external debt of the non-euro-area
members of the EU



Stock of direct foreign investment - at home:


$NA



Exchange rates:


euros per US dollar - 0.7715 (2010), 0.7338 (2009), 0.6827 (2008),
0.7345 (2007), 0.7964 (2006)







Communications ::European Union




Telephones - main lines in use:


238 million (2005)



Telephones - mobile cellular:


466 million (2005)



Telephone system:


note - see individual country entries of member states



Internet country code:


.eu; note - see country entries of member states for individual
country codes



Internet hosts:


140,277; note - this sum reflects the number of internet hosts
assigned the .eu internet country code (2010)



Internet users:


247 million (2006)







Transportation ::European Union




Airports:


3,383 (2010)



Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1,992

over 3,047 m: 116

2,438 to 3,047 m: 340

1,524 to 2,437 m: 546

914 to 1,523 m: 422

under 914 m: 568 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 1,391

over 3,047 m: 2

2,438 to 3,047 m: 1

1,524 to 2,437 m: 22

914 to 1,523 m: 254

under 914 m: 1,112 (2010)



Heliports:


99 (2010)



Railways:


total: 229,450 km (2008)



Roadways:


total: 5,919,704 km (2008)



Waterways:


52,332 km (2006)



Ports and terminals:


Antwerp (Belgium), Barcelona (Spain), Braila (Romania), Bremen
(Germany), Burgas (Bulgaria), Constanta (Romania), Copenhagen
(Denmark), Galati (Romania), Gdansk (Poland), Hamburg (Germany),
Helsinki (Finland), Las Palmas (Canary Islands, Spain), Le Havre
(France), Lisbon (Portugal), London (UK), Marseille (France), Naples
(Italy), Peiraiefs or Piraeus (Greece), Riga (Latvia), Rotterdam
(Netherlands), Stockholm (Sweden), Talinn (Estonia), Tulcea
(Romania), Varna (Bulgaria)







Military ::European Union




Military - note:


the five-nation Eurocorps - created in 1992 by France, Germany,
Belgium, Spain, and Luxembourg - has deployed troops and police on
peacekeeping missions to Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and assumed command of the ISAF in
Afghanistan in August 2004; Eurocorps directly commands the
5,000-man Franco-German Brigade, the Multinational Command Support
Brigade, and EUFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina; in November 2004, the
EU Council of Ministers formally committed to creating 13 1,500-man
battle groups by the end of 2007, to respond to international crises
on a rotating basis; 22 of the EU's 27 nations have agreed to supply
troops; France, Italy, and the UK formed the first of three battle
groups in 2005; Norway, Sweden, Estonia, and Finland established the
Nordic Battle Group effective 1 January 2008; nine other groups are
to be formed; a rapid-reaction naval EU Maritime Task Group was
stood up in March 2007 (2007)







Transnational Issues ::European Union




Disputes - international:


as a political union, the EU has no border disputes with neighboring
countries, but Estonia has no land boundary agreements with Russia,
Slovenia disputes its land and maritime boundaries with Croatia, and
Spain has territorial and maritime disputes with Morocco and with
the UK over Gibraltar; the EU has set up a Schengen area -
consisting of 22 EU member states that have signed the convention
implementing the Schengen agreements or "acquis" (1985 and 1990) on
the free movement of persons and the harmonization of border
controls in Europe; these agreements became incorporated into EU law
with the implementation of the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam on 1 May
1999; in addition, non-EU states Iceland and Norway (as part of the
Nordic Union) have been included in the Schengen area since 1996
(full members in 2001), and Switzerland since 2008 bringing the
total current membership to 25; the UK (since 2000) and Ireland
(since 2002) take part in only some aspects of the Schengen area,
especially with respect to police and criminal matters; nine of the
12 new member states that joined the EU since 2004 joined Schengen
on 21 December 2007; of the three remaining EU states, Cyprus is
expected to join by 2009, while Romania and Bulgaria continue to
enhance their border security systems









page last updated on January 20, 2011

======================================================================





