Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)  (South America)

Introduction ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Background:


Although first sighted by an English navigator in 1592, the first
landing (English) did not occur until almost a century later in
1690, and the first settlement (French) was not established until
1764. The colony was turned over to Spain two years later and the
islands have since been the subject of a territorial dispute, first
between Britain and Spain, then between Britain and Argentina. The
UK asserted its claim to the islands by establishing a naval
garrison there in 1833. Argentina invaded the islands on 2 April
1982. The British responded with an expeditionary force that landed
seven weeks later and after fierce fighting forced an Argentine
surrender on 14 June 1982.







Geography ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Location:


Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic Ocean, east of
southern Argentina



Geographic coordinates:


51 45 S, 59 00 W



Map references:


South America



Area:


total: 12,173 sq km
country comparison to the world: 164
land: 12,173 sq km

water: 0 sq km

note: includes the two main islands of East and West Falkland and
about 200 small islands



Area - comparative:


slightly smaller than Connecticut



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


1,288 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

continental shelf: 200 nm

exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm



Climate:


cold marine; strong westerly winds, cloudy, humid; rain occurs on
more than half of days in year; average annual rainfall is 24 inches
in Stanley; occasional snow all year, except in January and
February, but typically does not accumulate



Terrain:


rocky, hilly, mountainous with some boggy, undulating plains



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point: Mount Usborne 705 m



Natural resources:


fish, squid, wildlife, calcified seaweed, sphagnum moss



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (99% permanent pastures, 1% other) (2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


strong winds persist throughout the year



Environment - current issues:


overfishing by unlicensed vessels is a problem; reindeer were
introduced to the islands in 2001 for commercial reasons; this is
the only commercial reindeer herd in the world unaffected by the
1986 Chornobyl disaster



Geography - note:


deeply indented coast provides good natural harbors; short growing
season







People ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Population:


3,140 (July 2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 230


Age structure:


0-14 years: NA

15-64 years: NA

65 years and over: NA



Population growth rate:


0.011% (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 193


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Urbanization:


urban population: 92% of total population (2008)

rate of urbanization: 1.2% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Falkland Islander(s)

adjective: Falkland Island



Ethnic groups:


British



Religions:


Christian 67.2%, none 31.5%, other 1.3% (2006 census)



Languages:


English



Literacy:


NA







Government ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)



Dependency status:


overseas territory of the UK; also claimed by Argentina



Government type:


NA



Capital:


name: Stanley

geographic coordinates: 51 42 S, 57 51 W

time difference: UTC-4 (1 hour ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins first Sunday in September; ends
third Sunday in April



Administrative divisions:


none (overseas territory of the UK; also claimed by Argentina)



Independence:


none (overseas territory of the UK; also claimed by Argentina)



National holiday:


Liberation Day, 14 June (1982)



Constitution:


1 January 2009



Legal system:


English common law



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)

head of government: Governor Nigel HAYWOOD (since 16 October 2010)
is the Queen's representative; Chief Executive Dr. Tim THOROGOOD
(since 3 January 2008)

cabinet: Executive Council; three members elected by the Legislative
Council, two ex officio members (chief executive and the financial
secretary), and the governor; the governor must obey the rulings of
the Executive Council on domestic affairs
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the monarchy is hereditary; governor appointed by the
monarch



Legislative branch:


unicameral Legislative Assembly (10 seats; 2 members are ex officio
and 8 are elected by popular vote; members to serve four-year
terms); presided over by the governor

elections: last held on 5 November 2009 (next to be held in November
2013)

election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - independents 8



Judicial branch:


Supreme Court (chief justice is a nonresident); Magistrates Court
(senior magistrate presides over civil and criminal divisions);
Court of Summary Jurisdiction



Political parties and leaders:


none; all independents



Political pressure groups and leaders:


Falkland Islands Association (supports freedom of the people from
external causes)



International organization participation:


UPU



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK; also claimed by Argentina)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK; also claimed by Argentina)



Flag description:


blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and
the Falkland Island coat of arms centered on the outer half of the
flag; the coat of arms contains a white ram (sheep raising was once
the major economic activity) above the sailing ship Desire (whose
crew discovered the islands) with a scroll at the bottom bearing the
motto DESIRE THE RIGHT



National anthem:


name: "Song of the Falklands""

lyrics/music: Christopher LANHAM

note: adopted 1930s; the song is the local unofficial anthem; as a
territory of the United Kingdom, "God Save the Queen" is official
(see United Kingdom)







Economy ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Economy - overview:


The economy was formerly based on agriculture, mainly sheep farming,
but today fishing contributes the bulk of economic activity. In
1987, the government began selling fishing licenses to foreign
trawlers operating within the Falkland Islands' exclusive fishing
zone. These license fees total more than $40 million per year, which
help support the island's health, education, and welfare system.
Squid accounts for 75% of the fish taken. Dairy farming supports
domestic consumption; crops furnish winter fodder. Foreign exchange
earnings come from shipments of high-grade wool to the UK and the
sale of postage stamps and coins. The islands are now self-financing
except for defense. The British Geological Survey announced a
200-mile oil exploration zone around the islands in 1993, and early
seismic surveys suggest substantial reserves capable of producing
500,000 barrels per day; to date, no exploitable site has been
identified. An agreement between Argentina and the UK in 1995 seeks
to defuse licensing and sovereignty conflicts that would dampen
foreign interest in exploiting potential oil reserves. Political
tensions between the UK and Argentina rose in early 2010 after a UK
company began oil drilling activities in the waters around the
Falkland Islands but abated somewhat when the drilling operation
failed to discover commercially exploitable oil reserves. Tourism,
especially eco-tourism, is increasing rapidly, with about 30,000
visitors in 2001. Another large source of income is interest paid on
money the government has in the bank. The British military presence
also provides a sizeable economic boost.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$105.1 million (2002 est.)
country comparison to the world: 220


GDP (official exchange rate):


$105.1 million (2002 est.)



GDP - real growth rate:


NA%



GDP - per capita (PPP):


$35,400 (2002 est.)
country comparison to the world: 33


GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: 95%

industry: NA%

services: NA% (1996)



Labor force:


1,724 (1996) (1996)
country comparison to the world: 224


Labor force - by occupation:


agriculture: 95% (mostly sheepherding and fishing)

industry and services: 5% (1996)



Unemployment rate:


NA%



Population below poverty line:


NA%



Household income or consumption by percentage share:


lowest 10%: NA%

highest 10%: NA%



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


3.6% (1998)
country comparison to the world: 105


Agriculture - products:


fodder and vegetable crops; sheep, dairy products; fish, squid



Industries:


fish and wool processing; tourism



Industrial production growth rate:


NA%



Electricity - production:


16 million kWh (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 207


Electricity - consumption:


14.88 million kWh (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 208


Electricity - exports:


0 kWh (2008 est.)



Electricity - imports:


0 kWh (2008 est.)



Oil - production:


0 bbl/day (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 176


Oil - consumption:


0 bbl/day (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 205


Oil - exports:


0 bbl/day (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 196


Oil - imports:


271 bbl/day (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 198


Oil - proved reserves:


0 bbl (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 181


Natural gas - production:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 197


Natural gas - consumption:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 186


Natural gas - exports:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 181


Natural gas - imports:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 181


Natural gas - proved reserves:


0 cu m (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 181


Exports:


$125 million (2004 est.)
country comparison to the world: 187


Exports - commodities:


wool, hides, meat, fish, squid



Imports:


$90 million (2004 est.)
country comparison to the world: 210


Imports - commodities:


fuel, food and drink, building materials, clothing



Debt - external:


$NA



Exchange rates:


Falkland pounds (FKP) per US dollar - 0.5302 (2008), 0.4993 (2007),
0.5418 (2006), 0.5493 (2005), 0.5462 (2004)

note: the Falkland pound is at par with the British pound







Communications ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Telephones - main lines in use:


2,000 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 223


Telephones - mobile cellular:


3,300 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 212


Telephone system:


general assessment: NA

domestic: government-operated radiotelephone and private VHF/CB
radiotelephone networks provide effective service to almost all
points on both islands

international: country code - 500; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) with links through London to other
countries



Broadcast media:


television service provided by a multi-channel service provider;
radio services provided by the public broadcaster Falkland Islands
Radio Service (FIRS), broadcasting on both AM and FM frequencies,
and by the British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) (2007)



Internet country code:


.fk



Internet hosts:


91 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 203


Internet users:


2,900 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 208






Transportation ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Airports:


7 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 167


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 2

2,438 to 3,047 m: 1

914 to 1,523 m: 1 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 5

under 914 m: 5 (2010)



Roadways:


total: 440 km
country comparison to the world: 197
paved: 50 km

unpaved: 390 km (2008)



Ports and terminals:


Stanley







Military ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Military branches:


no regular military forces



Military expenditures:


NA



Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the UK







Transnational Issues ::Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)




Disputes - international:


Argentina, which claims the islands in its constitution and briefly
occupied them by force in 1982, agreed in 1995 to no longer seek
settlement by force; UK continues to reject Argentine requests for
sovereignty talks









page last updated on January 10, 2011

======================================================================





