French Southern and Antarctic Lands  (Antarctica)

Introduction ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Background:


In February 2007, the Iles Eparses became an integral part of the
French Southern and Antarctic Lands (TAAF). The Southern Lands are
now divided into five administrative districts, two of which are
archipelagos, Iles Crozet and Iles Kerguelen; the third is a
district composed of two volcanic islands, Ile Saint-Paul and Ile
Amsterdam; the fourth, Iles Eparses, consists of five scattered
tropical islands around Madagascar. They contain no permanent
inhabitants and are visited only by researchers studying the native
fauna, scientists at the various scientific stations, fishermen, and
military personnel. The fifth district is the Antarctic portion,
which consists of "Adelie Land," a thin slice of the Antarctic
continent discovered and claimed by the French in 1840.

Ile Amsterdam: Discovered but not named in 1522 by the Spanish, the
island subsequently received the appellation of Nieuw Amsterdam from
a Dutchman; it was claimed by France in 1843. A short-lived attempt
at cattle farming began in 1871. A French meteorological station
established on the island in 1949 is still in use.

Ile Saint Paul: Claimed by France since 1893, the island was a
fishing industry center from 1843 to 1914. In 1928, a spiny lobster
cannery was established, but when the company went bankrupt in 1931,
seven workers were abandoned. Only two survived until 1934 when
rescue finally arrived.

Iles Crozet: A large archipelago formed from the Crozet Plateau,
Iles Crozet is divided into two main groups: L'Occidental (the
West), which includes Ile aux Cochons, Ilots des Apotres, Ile des
Pingouins, and the reefs Brisants de l'Heroine; and L'Oriental (the
east), which includes Ile d'Est and Ile de la Possession (the
largest island of the Crozets). Discovered and claimed by France in
1772, the islands were used for seal hunting and as a base for
whaling. Originally administered as a dependency of Madagascar, they
became part of the TAAF in 1955.

Iles Kerguelen: This island group, discovered in 1772, is made up of
one large island (Ile Kerguelen) and about 300 smaller islands. A
permanent group of 50 to 100 scientists resides at the main base at
Port-aux-Francais.

Adelie Land: The only non-insular district of the TAAF is the
Antarctic claim known as "Adelie Land." The US Government does not
recognize it as a French dependency.

Bassas da India: A French possession since 1897, this atoll is a
volcanic rock surrounded by reefs and is awash at high tide.

Europa Island: This heavily wooded island has been a French
possession since 1897; it is the site of a small military garrison
that staffs a weather station.

Glorioso Islands: A French possession since 1892, the Glorioso
Islands are composed of two lushly vegetated coral islands (Ile
Glorieuse and Ile du Lys) and three rock islets. A military garrison
operates a weather and radio station on Ile Glorieuse.

Juan de Nova Island: Named after a famous 15th century Spanish
navigator and explorer, the island has been a French possession
since 1897. It has been exploited for its guano and phosphate.
Presently a small military garrison oversees a meteorological
station.

Tromelin Island: First explored by the French in 1776, the island
came under the jurisdiction of Reunion in 1814. At present, it
serves as a sea turtle sanctuary and is the site of an important
meteorological station.







Geography ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Location:


southeast and east of Africa, islands in the southern Indian Ocean,
some near Madagascar and others about equidistant between Africa,
Antarctica, and Australia; note - French Southern and Antarctic
Lands include Ile Amsterdam, Ile Saint-Paul, Iles Crozet, Iles
Kerguelen, Bassas da India, Europa Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de
Nova Island, and Tromelin Island in the southern Indian Ocean, along
with the French-claimed sector of Antarctica, "Adelie Land"; the US
does not recognize the French claim to "Adelie Land"



Geographic coordinates:


Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): 37 50 S, 77 32 E

Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): 38 72 S, 77 53 E

Iles Crozet: 46 25 S, 51 00 E

Iles Kerguelen: 49 15 S, 69 35 E

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): 21 30 S, 39 50 E

Europa Island (Iles Eparses): 22 20 S, 40 22 E

Glorioso Islands (Iles Eparses): 11 30 S, 47 20 E

Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses): 17 03 S, 42 45 E

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): 15 52 S, 54 25 E



Map references:


Antarctic Region



Area:


Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): total - 55 sq km;
land - 55 sq km; water - 0 sq km
country comparison to the world: 229
Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): total - 7 sq km;
land - 7 sq km; water - 0 sq km

Iles Crozet: total - 352 sq km; land - 352 sq km; water - 0 sq km

Iles Kerguelen: total - 7,215 sq km; land - 7,215 sq km; water - 0
sq km

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): total - 80 sq km; land - 0.2 sq km;
water - 79.8 sq km (lagoon)

Europa Island (Iles Eparses): total - 28 sq km; land - 28 sq km;
water - 0 sq km

Glorioso Islands (Iles Eparses): total - 5 sq km; land - 5 sq km;
water - 0 sq km

Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses): total - 4.4 sq km; land - 4.4 sq
km; water - 0 sq km

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): total - 1 sq km; land - 1 sq km;
water - 0 sq km

note: excludes "Adelie Land" claim of about 500,000 sq km in
Antarctica that is not recognized by the US



Area - comparative:


Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): less than one-half
the size of Washington, DC

Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): more than 10 times
the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Iles Crozet: about twice the size of Washington, DC

Iles Kerguelen: slightly larger than Delaware

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): land area about one-third the size
of The Mall in Washington, DC

Europa Island (Iles Eparses): about one-sixth the size of
Washington, DC

Glorioso Islands (Iles Eparses): about eight times the size of The
Mall in Washington, DC

Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses): about seven times the size of
The Mall in Washington, DC

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): about 1.7 times the size of The Mall
in Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): 28 km

Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul):

Iles Kerguelen: 2,800 km

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): 35.2 km

Europa Island (Iles Eparses): 22.2 km

Glorioso Islands (Iles Eparses): 35.2 km

Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses): 24.1 km

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): 3.7 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm from Iles Kerguelen and Iles Eparses
(does not include the rest of French Southern and Antarctic Lands);
Juan de Nova Island and Tromelin Island claim a continental shelf of
200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation



Climate:


Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul: oceanic with persistent westerly
winds and high humidity

Iles Crozet: windy, cold, wet, and cloudy

Iles Kerguelen: oceanic, cold, overcast, windy

Iles Eparses: tropical



Terrain:


Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): a volcanic island
with steep coastal cliffs; the center floor of the volcano is a
large plateau

Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): triangular in
shape, the island is the top of a volcano, rocky with steep cliffs
on the eastern side; has active thermal springs

Iles Crozet: a large archipelago formed from the Crozet Plateau is
divided into two groups of islands

Iles Kerguelen: the interior of the large island of Ile Kerguelen is
composed of rugged terrain of high mountains, hills, valleys, and
plains with a number of peninsulas stretching off its coasts

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): atoll, awash at high tide; shallow
(15 m) lagoon

Europa Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island: low, flat, and
sandy

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): low, flat, sandy; likely volcanic
seamount



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point: Mont de la Dives on Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et
Ile Saint-Paul) 867 m; unnamed location on Ile Saint-Paul (Ile
Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul) 272 m; Pic Marion-Dufresne in Iles
Crozet 1,090 m; Mont Ross in Iles Kerguelen 1,850 m; unnamed
location on Bassas de India (Iles Eparses) 2.4 m; unnamed location
on Europa Island (Iles Eparses) 24 m; unnamed location on Glorioso
Islands (Iles Eparses) 12 m; unnamed location on Juan de Nova Island
(Iles Eparses) 10 m; unnamed location on Tromelin Island (Iles
Eparses) 7 m



Natural resources:


fish, crayfish

note: Glorioso Islands and Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses) have
guano, phosphates, and coconuts



Land use:


Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul) - 100% trees,
grasses, ferns, and moss; Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile
Saint-Paul) - 100% grass, ferns, and moss; Iles Crozet - 100%
tossock grass, heath, and fern; Iles Kerguelen - 100% tossock grass
and Kerguelen cabbage; Bassas da India (Iles Eparses) - 100% rock,
coral reef, and sand; Europa Island (Iles Eparses) - 100% mangrove
swamp and dry woodlands; Glorioso Islands (Iles Eparses) - 100% lush
vegetation and coconut palms; Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses) -
90% forest, 10% other; Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses) - 100% grasses
and scattered brush (2005)



Irrigated land:


0 sq km



Natural hazards:


Ile Amsterdam and Ile Saint-Paul are inactive volcanoes; Iles
Eparses subject to periodic cyclones; Bassas da India is a maritime
hazard since it is under water for a period of three hours prior to
and following the high tide and surrounded by reefs

volcanism: Reunion Island - Piton de la Fournaise (elev. 2,632 m,
8,635 ft), which has erupted many times in recent years, including
2010, is one of the world's most active volcanoes; although rare,
eruptions outside the volcano's caldera could threaten nearby cities



Environment - current issues:


introduction of foreign species on Iles Crozet has caused severe
damage to the original ecosystem; overfishing of Patagonian
toothfish around Iles Crozet and Iles Kerguelen



Geography - note:


islands component is widely scattered across remote locations in the
southern Indian Ocean

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): the atoll is a circular reef that
sits atop a long-extinct, submerged volcano

Europa Island and Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses): wildlife
sanctuary for seabirds and sea turtles

Glorioso Island (Iles Eparses): the islands and rocks are surrounded
by an extensive reef system

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): climatologically important location
for forecasting cyclones in the western Indian Ocean; wildlife
sanctuary (seabirds, tortoises)







People ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

Ile Amsterdam (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): has no permanent
residents but has a meteorological station

Ile Saint-Paul (Ile Amsterdam et Ile Saint-Paul): is uninhabited but
is frequently visited by fishermen and has a scientific research
cabin for short stays

Iles Crozet: are uninhabited except for 18 to 30 people staffing the
Alfred Faure research station on Ile del la Possession

Iles Kerguelen: 50 to 100 scientists are located at the main base at
Port-aux-Francais on Ile Kerguelen

Bassas da India (Iles Eparses): uninhabitable

Europa Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island (Iles Eparses):
a small French military garrison and a few meteorologists on each
possession; visited by scientists

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): uninhabited, except for visits by
scientists







Government ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Country name:


conventional long form: Territory of the French Southern and
Antarctic Lands

conventional short form: French Southern and Antarctic Lands

local long form: Territoire des Terres Australes et Antarctiques
Francaises

local short form: Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises

abbreviation: TAAF



Dependency status:


overseas territory of France since 1955



Administrative divisions:


none (overseas territory of France); there are no first-order
administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
are five administrative districts named Iles Crozet, Iles Eparses,
Iles Kerguelen, Ile Saint-Paul et Ile Amsterdam; the fifth district
is the "Adelie Land" claim in Antarctica that is not recognized by
the US



Legal system:


the laws of France where applicable apply



Executive branch:


chief of state: President Nicolas SARKOZY (since 16 May 2007),
represented by Senior Administrator Christian GAUDIN (since 4
November 2010)



International organization participation:


UPU



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of France)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of France)



Flag description:


the flag of France is used



National anthem:


note: as a territory of France, "La Marseillaise" is official (see
France)







Economy ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Economy - overview:


Economic activity is limited to servicing meteorological and
geophysical research stations, military bases, and French and other
fishing fleets. The fish catches landed on Iles Kerguelen by foreign
ships are exported to France and Reunion.







Communications ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Internet country code:


.tf



Internet hosts:


44 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 212


Communications - note:


one or more meteorological stations on each possession; note -
meteorological station on Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses) is
important for forecasting cyclones







Transportation ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Airports:


4 (note - one each on Europa Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova
Island, and Tromelin Island in the Iles Eparses district) (2010)
country comparison to the world: 188


Ports and terminals:


none; offshore anchorage only



Transportation - note:


aids to navigation - lighthouses: Europa Island 18m; Juan de Nova
Island (W side) 37m; Tromelin Island (NW point) 11m (all in the Iles
Eparses district)







Military ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of France







Transnational Issues ::French Southern and Antarctic Lands




Disputes - international:


French claim to "Adelie Land" in Antarctica is not recognized by the
US

Bassas da India, Europa Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova
Island (Iles Eparses): claimed by Madagascar; the vegetated drying
cays of Banc du Geyser, which were claimed by Madagascar in 1976,
also fall within the EEZ claims of the Comoros and France (Glorioso
Islands)

Tromelin Island (Iles Eparses): claimed by Mauritius









page last updated on December 29, 2010

======================================================================





