Guam  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Guam




Background:


Guam was ceded to the US by Spain in 1898. Captured by the Japanese
in 1941, it was retaken by the US three years later. The military
installation on the island is one of the most strategically
important US bases in the Pacific.







Geography ::Guam




Location:


Oceania, island in the North Pacific Ocean, about three-quarters of
the way from Hawaii to the Philippines



Geographic coordinates:


13 28 N, 144 47 E



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 544 sq km

land: 544 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


three times the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


125.5 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical marine; generally warm and humid, moderated by northeast
trade winds; dry season (January to June), rainy season (July to
December); little seasonal temperature variation



Terrain:


volcanic origin, surrounded by coral reefs; relatively flat
coralline limestone plateau (source of most fresh water), with steep
coastal cliffs and narrow coastal plains in north, low hills in
center, mountains in south



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point: Mount Lamlam 406 m



Natural resources:


aquatic wildlife (supporting tourism), fishing (largely undeveloped)



Land use:


arable land: 3.64%

permanent crops: 18.18%

other: 78.18% (2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


frequent squalls during rainy season; relatively rare but
potentially destructive typhoons (June - December)



Environment - current issues:


extirpation of native bird population by the rapid proliferation of
the brown tree snake, an exotic, invasive species



Geography - note:


largest and southernmost island in the Mariana Islands archipelago;
strategic location in western North Pacific Ocean







People ::Guam




Population:


180,865 (July 2010 est.)



Age structure:


0-14 years: 27.8% (male 25,651/female 23,904)

15-64 years: 65.2% (male 59,304/female 56,995)

65 years and over: 7% (male 5,786/female 6,790) (2010 est.)



Median age:


total: 29.3 years

male: 28.9 years

female: 29.7 years (2010 est.)



Population growth rate:


1.346% (2010 est.)



Birth rate:


18.1 births/1,000 population (2010 est.)



Death rate:


4.64 deaths/1,000 population (July 2010 est.)



Net migration rate:


0 migrant(s)/1,000 population



Urbanization:


urban population: 93% of total population (2008)

rate of urbanization: 1.3% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)



Sex ratio:


at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female

15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female

65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female

total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (2010 est.)



Infant mortality rate:


total: 5.93 deaths/1,000 live births

male: 6.35 deaths/1,000 live births

female: 5.49 deaths/1,000 live births (2010 est.)



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: 78.18 years

male: 75.14 years

female: 81.41 years (2010 est.)



Total fertility rate:


2.52 children born/woman (2010 est.)



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Guamanian(s) (US citizens)

adjective: Guamanian



Ethnic groups:


Chamorro 37.1%, Filipino 26.3%, other Pacific islander 11.3%, white
6.9%, other Asian 6.3%, other ethnic origin or race 2.3%, mixed 9.8%
(2000 census)



Religions:


Roman Catholic 85%, other 15% (1999 est.)



Languages:


English 38.3%, Chamorro 22.2%, Philippine languages 22.2%, other
Pacific island languages 6.8%, Asian languages 7%, other languages
3.5% (2000 census)



Literacy:


definition: age 15 and over can read and write

total population: 99%

male: 99%

female: 99% (1990 est.)



Education expenditures:


NA







Government ::Guam




Country name:


conventional long form: Territory of Guam

conventional short form: Guam

local long form: Guahan

local short form: Guahan



Dependency status:


organized, unincorporated territory of the US with policy relations
between Guam and the US under the jurisdiction of the Office of
Insular Affairs, US Department of the Interior



Government type:


NA



Capital:


name: Hagatna (Agana)

geographic coordinates: 13 28 N, 144 44 E

time difference: UTC+10 (15 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)



Administrative divisions:


none (territory of the US)



Independence:


none (territory of the US)



National holiday:


Discovery Day, first Monday in March (1521)



Constitution:


Organic Act of Guam, 1 August 1950



Legal system:


modeled on US; US federal laws apply



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal; US citizens but do not vote in US
presidential elections



Executive branch:


chief of state: President Barack H. OBAMA (since 20 January 2009);
Vice President Joseph R. BIDEN (since 20 January 2009)

head of government: Governor Eddie CALVO (since 3 January 2011);
Lieutenant Governor Ray TENORIO (since 3 January 2011)

cabinet: heads of executive departments; appointed by the governor
with the consent of the Guam legislature
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: under the US Constitution, residents of unincorporated
territories, such as Guam, do not vote in elections for US president
and vice president; however, they may vote in Democratic and
Republican presidential primary elections; governor and lieutenant
governor elected on the same ticket by popular vote for a four-year
term (can serve two consecutive terms, then must wait a full term
before running again); election last held on 2 November 2010 (next
to be held in November 2014)

election results: Eddie CALVO elected governor; percent of vote -
50.6%; Ray TENORIO elected lieutenant governor



Legislative branch:


unicameral Legislature (15 seats; members elected by popular vote to
serve two-year terms)

elections: last held on 2 November 2010 (next to be held in November
2012)

election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party -
Democratic Party 9, Republican Party 6

note: Guam elects one nonvoting delegate to the US House of
Representatives; election last held on 2 November 2010 (next to be
held in November 2012); results - percent of vote by party - NA;
seats by party - Democratic Party 1



Judicial branch:


Federal District Court (judge is appointed by the president);
Territorial Superior Court (judges appointed for eight-year terms by
the governor)



Political parties and leaders:


Democratic Party [Michael PHILLIPS]; Republican Party [Philip J.
FLORES] (controls the legislature)



Political pressure groups and leaders:


Guam Federation of Teachers' Union; Guam Waterworks Authority Workers

other: activists; indigenous groups



International organization participation:


IOC, SPC, UPU



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (territory of the US)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (territory of the US)



Flag description:


territorial flag is dark blue with a narrow red border on all four
sides; centered is a red-bordered, pointed, vertical ellipse
containing a beach scene, a proa or outrigger canoe with sail, and a
palm tree with the word GUAM superimposed in bold red letters; the
proa is sailing in Agana Bay with the promontory of Punta Dos
Amantes, near the capital, in the background; blue represents the
sea and red the blood shed in the struggle against oppression

note: the US flag is the national flag



National anthem:


name: "Fanohge Chamoru" (Stand Ye Guamanians)

lyrics/music: Ramon Manalisay SABLAN [English], Lagrimas UNTALAN
[Chamoru]/Ramon Manalisay SABLAN

note: adopted 1919; the local anthem is also known as "Guam Hymn";
as a territory of the United States, "The Star-Spangled Banner,"
which generally follows the playing of "Stand Ye Guamanians," is
official (see United States)







Economy ::Guam




Economy - overview:


The economy depends largely on US military spending and tourism.
Total US grants, wage payments, and procurement outlays amounted to
$1.3 billion in 2004. Over the past 30 years, the tourist industry
has grown to become the largest income source following national
defense. The Guam economy continues to experience expansion in both
its tourism and military sectors.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$2.5 billion (2005 est.)



GDP (official exchange rate):


$2.773 billion (2001)



GDP - real growth rate:


NA%



GDP - per capita (PPP):


$15,000 (2005 est.)



GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: NA%

industry: NA%

services: NA%



Labor force:


82,950 (2007 est.)



Labor force - by occupation:


agriculture: 26%

industry: 10%

services: 64% (2004 est.)



Unemployment rate:


11.4% (2002 est.)



Population below poverty line:


23% (2001 est.)



Household income or consumption by percentage share:


lowest 10%: NA%

highest 10%: NA%



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


2.5% (2005 est.)



Agriculture - products:


fruits, copra, vegetables; eggs, pork, poultry, beef



Industries:


US military, tourism, construction, transshipment services, concrete
products, printing and publishing, food processing, textiles



Industrial production growth rate:


NA%



Electricity - production:


1.767 billion kWh (2007 est.)



Electricity - consumption:


1.644 billion kWh (2007 est.)



Electricity - exports:


0 kWh (2008 est.)



Electricity - imports:


0 kWh (2008 est.)



Oil - production:


0 bbl/day (2009 est.)



Oil - consumption:


10,620 bbl/day (2009 est.)



Oil - exports:


0 bbl/day (2007 est.)



Oil - imports:


14,230 bbl/day (2007 est.)



Oil - proved reserves:


0 bbl (1 January 2010 est.)



Natural gas - production:


0 cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - consumption:


0 cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - exports:


0 cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - imports:


0 cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - proved reserves:


0 cu m (1 January 2010 est.)



Exports:


$45 million (2004 est.)



Exports - commodities:


transshipments of refined petroleum products, construction
materials, fish, food and beverage products



Imports:


$701 million (2004 est.)



Imports - commodities:


petroleum and petroleum products, food, manufactured goods



Debt - external:


$NA



Exchange rates:


the US dollar is used







Communications ::Guam




Telephones - main lines in use:


65,500 (2009)



Telephones - mobile cellular:


98,000 (2004)



Telephone system:


general assessment: modern system, integrated with US facilities for
direct dialing, including free use of 800 numbers

domestic: digital system, including mobile-cellular service and
local access to the Internet

international: country code - 1-671; major landing point for
submarine cables between Asia and the US (Guam is a trans-Pacific
communications hub for major carriers linking the US and Asia);
satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)



Broadcast media:


about a dozen TV broadcast channels, including digital channels;
multi-channel cable TV services are available; roughly 20 radio
stations broadcasting (2009)



Internet country code:


.gu



Internet hosts:


24 (2010)



Internet users:


90,000 (2009)







Transportation ::Guam




Airports:


5; note - 2 serviceable (2010)



Airports - with paved runways:


total: 4

over 3,047 m: 2

2,438 to 3,047 m: 1

914 to 1,523 m: 1 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 1

under 914 m: 1 (2010)



Roadways:


total: 1,045 km (2008)



Ports and terminals:


Apra Harbor







Military ::Guam




Manpower fit for military service:


males age 16-49: 37,983

females age 16-49: 36,469 (2010 est.)



Manpower reaching militarily significant age annually:


male: 1,687

female: 1,597 (2010 est.)



Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the US







Transnational Issues ::Guam




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on January 3, 2011

======================================================================





