Indian Ocean  (Oceans)

Introduction ::Indian Ocean




Background:


The Indian Ocean is the third largest of the world's five oceans
(after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, but larger than the
Southern Ocean and Arctic Ocean). Four critically important access
waterways are the Suez Canal (Egypt), Bab el Mandeb
(Djibouti-Yemen), Strait of Hormuz (Iran-Oman), and Strait of
Malacca (Indonesia-Malaysia). The decision by the International
Hydrographic Organization in the spring of 2000 to delimit a fifth
ocean, the Southern Ocean, removed the portion of the Indian Ocean
south of 60 degrees south latitude.







Geography ::Indian Ocean




Location:


body of water between Africa, the Southern Ocean, Asia, and Australia



Geographic coordinates:


20 00 S, 80 00 E



Map references:


Political Map of the World



Area:


total: 68.556 million sq km

note: includes Andaman Sea, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, Flores Sea,
Great Australian Bight, Gulf of Aden, Gulf of Oman, Java Sea,
Mozambique Channel, Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Savu Sea, Strait of
Malacca, Timor Sea, and other tributary water bodies



Area - comparative:


about 5.5 times the size of the US



Coastline:


66,526 km



Climate:


northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest monsoon (June to
October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June and
October/November in the northern Indian Ocean and January/February
in the southern Indian Ocean



Terrain:


surface dominated by counterclockwise gyre (broad, circular system
of currents) in the southern Indian Ocean; unique reversal of
surface currents in the northern Indian Ocean; low atmospheric
pressure over southwest Asia from hot, rising, summer air results in
the southwest monsoon and southwest-to-northeast winds and currents,
while high pressure over northern Asia from cold, falling, winter
air results in the northeast monsoon and northeast-to-southwest
winds and currents; ocean floor is dominated by the Mid-Indian Ocean
Ridge and subdivided by the Southeast Indian Ocean Ridge, Southwest
Indian Ocean Ridge, and Ninetyeast Ridge



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Java Trench -7,258 m

highest point: sea level 0 m



Natural resources:


oil and gas fields, fish, shrimp, sand and gravel aggregates, placer
deposits, polymetallic nodules



Natural hazards:


occasional icebergs pose navigational hazard in southern reaches



Environment - current issues:


endangered marine species include the dugong, seals, turtles, and
whales; oil pollution in the Arabian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea



Geography - note:


major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of Hormuz, Strait of
Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and the Lombok Strait









Economy ::Indian Ocean




Economy - overview:


The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes connecting the Middle
East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the Americas. It carries
a particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and petroleum products
from the oilfields of the Persian Gulf and Indonesia. Its fish are
of great and growing importance to the bordering countries for
domestic consumption and export. Fishing fleets from Russia, Japan,
South Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian Ocean, mainly for
shrimp and tuna. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being tapped in
the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and western
Australia. An estimated 40% of the world's offshore oil production
comes from the Indian Ocean. Beach sands rich in heavy minerals and
offshore placer deposits are actively exploited by bordering
countries, particularly India, South Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka,
and Thailand.








Transportation ::Indian Ocean




Ports and terminals:


Chennai (Madras; India), Colombo (Sri Lanka), Durban (South Africa),
Jakarta (Indonesia), Kolkata (Calcutta; India) Melbourne
(Australia), Mumbai (Bombay; India), Richards Bay (South Africa)



Transportation - note:


the International Maritime Bureau reports the territorial waters of
littoral states and offshore waters as high risk for piracy and
armed robbery against ships, particularly in the Gulf of Aden, along
the east coast of Africa, the Bay of Bengal, and the Strait of
Malacca; numerous vessels, including commercial shipping and
pleasure craft, have been attacked and hijacked both at anchor and
while underway; hijacked vessels are often disguised and cargoes
stolen; crew and passengers are often held for ransom, murdered, or
cast adrift; the presence of several naval task forces in the Gulf
of Aden and additional anti-piracy measures on the part of ship
operators have reduced the piracy incidents; in response local
pirates shifted operations farther south along the east coast of
Somalia and eastward along the coast of Oman








Transnational Issues ::Indian Ocean




Disputes - international:


some maritime disputes (see littoral states)









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





