Jan Mayen  (Europe)

Introduction ::Jan Mayen




Background:


This desolate, arctic, mountainous island was named after a Dutch
whaling captain who indisputably discovered it in 1614 (earlier
claims are inconclusive). Visited only occasionally by seal hunters
and trappers over the following centuries, the island came under
Norwegian sovereignty in 1929. The long dormant Beerenberg volcano
resumed activity in 1970; the most recent eruption occurred in 1985.
It is the northernmost active volcano on earth.







Geography ::Jan Mayen




Location:


Northern Europe, island between the Greenland Sea and the Norwegian
Sea, northeast of Iceland



Geographic coordinates:


71 00 N, 8 00 W



Map references:


Europe



Area:


total: 377 sq km
country comparison to the world: 203
land: 377 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


124.1 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 4 nm

contiguous zone: 10 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm

continental shelf: 200 m depth or to the depth of exploitation



Climate:


arctic maritime with frequent storms and persistent fog



Terrain:


volcanic island, partly covered by glaciers



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Norwegian Sea 0 m

highest point: Haakon VII Toppen on Beerenberg 2,277 m

note: Beerenberg volcano has numerous peaks; the highest point on
the volcano rim is named Haakon VII Toppen, after Norway's first
king following the reestablishment of Norwegian independence in 1905



Natural resources:


none



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Irrigated land:


0 sq km



Natural hazards:


dominated by the volcano Beerenberg

volcanism: Beerenberg (elev. 2,227 m, 7,306 ft) is Norway's only
active volcano; volcanic activity resumed in 1970; the most recent
eruption occurred in 1985



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


barren volcanic island with some moss and grass







People ::Jan Mayen




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

note: personnel operate the Long Range Navigation (Loran-C) base and
the weather and coastal services radio station







Government ::Jan Mayen




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Jan Mayen



Dependency status:


territory of Norway; since August 1994, administered from Oslo
through the county governor (fylkesmann) of Nordland; however,
authority has been delegated to a station commander of the Norwegian
Defense Communication Service



Legal system:


the laws of Norway where applicable apply



Flag description:


the flag of Norway is used







Economy ::Jan Mayen




Economy - overview:


Jan Mayen is a volcanic island with no exploitable natural
resources, although surrounding waters contain substantial fish
stocks and potential untapped petroleum resources. Economic activity
is limited to providing services for employees of Norway's radio and
meteorological stations on the island.







Communications ::Jan Mayen




Broadcast media:


a coastal radio station has been remotely operated since 1994 (2008)







Transportation ::Jan Mayen




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 220


Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 1

1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (2010)



Ports and terminals:


none; offshore anchorage only







Military ::Jan Mayen




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of Norway







Transnational Issues ::Jan Mayen




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





