Kosovo  (Europe)

Introduction ::Kosovo




Background:


Ethnic Serbs migrated to the territories of modern Kosovo in the 7th
century but did not fully incorporate them into the Serbian realm
until the early 13th century. During the medieval period, Kosovo
became the center of a Serbian Empire and saw the construction of
many important Serb religious sites, including many architecturally
significant Serbian Orthodox monasteries. The defeat of Serbian
forces at the Battle of Kosovo in 1389 led to five centuries of
Ottoman rule during which large numbers of Turks and Albanians moved
to Kosovo. By the end of the 19th century, Albanians replaced the
Serbs as the dominant ethnic group in Kosovo. Serbia reacquired
control over Kosovo from the Ottoman Empire during the First Balkan
War of 1912. Kosovo became an autonomous province of Serbia with
status almost equivalent to that of a republic under the 1974
Constitution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Despite legislative concessions, Albanian nationalism increased in
the 1980s, which led to riots and calls for Kosovo's independence.
At the same time, Serb nationalist leaders, such as Slobodan
MILOSEVIC, exploited Kosovo Serb claims of maltreatment to secure
votes from supporters, many of whom viewed Kosovo as their cultural
heartland. Under MILOSEVIC's leadership, Serbia instituted a new
constitution in 1989 that revoked Kosovo's status as an autonomous
province of Serbia. Kosovo Albanian leaders responded in 1991 by
organizing a referendum that declared Kosovo independent. Under
MILOSEVIC, Serbia carried out repressive measures against the
Albanians in the early 1990s as the unofficial Kosovo government,
led by Ibrahim RUGOVA, used passive resistance in an attempt to try
to gain international assistance and recognition of an independent
Kosovo. Albanians dissatisfied with RUGOVA's passive strategy in the
1990s created the Kosovo Liberation Army and launched an insurgency.
Starting in 1998, Serbian military, police, and paramilitary forces
conducted a counterinsurgency campaign that resulted in massacres
and massive expulsions of ethnic Albanians. Approximately 800,000
Albanians were forced from their homes in Kosovo during this time.
International attempts to mediate the conflict failed, and
MILOSEVIC's rejection of a proposed settlement led to a three-month
NATO military campaign against Serbia beginning in March 1999 that
forced Serbia to agree to withdraw its military and police forces
from Kosovo. UN Security Council Resolution 1244 (1999) placed
Kosovo under a transitional administration, the UN Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), pending a determination of
Kosovo's future status. A UN-led process began in late 2005 to
determine Kosovo's final status. The negotiations ran in stages
between 2006 and 2007, but ended without agreement between Belgrade
and Pristina. On 17 February 2008, the Kosovo Assembly declared
Kosovo independent. Since then, over sixty countries have recognized
Kosovo, and it has joined the International Monetary Fund and World
Bank. Serbia continues to reject Kosovo's independence and it
subsequently sought an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice (ICJ) on the legality under international law of Kosovo's
independence declaration. In July 2010 the ICJ ruled that Kosovo's
declaration of independence did not violate international law.







Geography ::Kosovo




Location:


Southeast Europe, between Serbia and Macedonia



Geographic coordinates:


42 35 N, 21 00 E



Map references:


Europe



Area:


total: 10,887 sq km
country comparison to the world: 168
land: 10,887 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


slightly larger than Delaware



Land boundaries:


total: 702 km

border countries: Albania 112 km, Macedonia 159 km, Montenegro 79
km, Serbia 352 km



Coastline:


0 km (landlocked)



Maritime claims:


none (landlocked)



Climate:


influenced by continental air masses resulting in relatively cold
winters with heavy snowfall and hot, dry summers and autumns;
Mediterranean and alpine influences create regional variation;
maximum rainfall between October and December



Terrain:


flat fluvial basin with an elevation of 400-700 m above sea level
surrounded by several high mountain ranges with elevations of 2,000
to 2,500 m



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Drini i Bardhe/Beli Drim 297 m (located on the border
with Albania)

highest point: Gjeravica/Deravica 2,656 m



Natural resources:


nickel, lead, zinc, magnesium, lignite, kaolin, chrome, bauxite







People ::Kosovo




Population:


1,815,048 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 148


Age structure:


0-14 years: 27.7% (male 260,678/female 239,779)

15-64 years: 65.7% (male 617,890/female 567,939)

65 years and over: 6.6% (male 50,463/female 68,089) (2010 est.)



Median age:


total: 26.3 years

male: 25.8 years

female: 26.8 years (2010 est.)



Sex ratio:


at birth: 1.086 male(s)/female

under 15 years: 1.09 male(s)/female

15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female

65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female

total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (2010 est.)



Nationality:


noun: Kosovar (Albanian), Kosovac (Serbian)

adjective: Kosovar (Albanian), Kosovski (Serbian)

note: Kosovan, a neutral term, is sometimes also used as a noun or
adjective



Ethnic groups:


Albanians 92%, other (Serb, Bosniak, Gorani, Roma, Turk, Ashkali,
Egyptian) 8% (2008)



Religions:


Muslim, Serbian Orthodox, Roman Catholic



Languages:


Albanian (official), Serbian (official), Bosnian, Turkish, Roma



Literacy:


definition: age 15 and over can read and write

total population: 91.9%

male: 96.6%

female: 87.5% (2007 Census)







Government ::Kosovo




Country name:


conventional long form: Republic of Kosovo

conventional short form: Kosovo

local long form: Republika e Kosoves (Republika Kosovo)

local short form: Kosova (Kosovo)



Government type:


republic



Capital:


name: Pristina (Prishtine, Prishtina)

geographic coordinates: 42 40 N, 21 10 E

time difference: UTC+1 (6 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins last Sunday in March; ends last
Sunday in October



Administrative divisions:


30 municipalities (komunat, singular - komuna in Albanian; opstine,
singular - opstina in Serbian); Decan (Decani), Dragash (Dragas),
Ferizaj (Urosevac), Fushe Kosove (Kosovo Polje), Gjakove (Dakovica),
Gjilan (Gnjilane), Gllogovc/Drenas (Glogovac), Istog (Istok),
Kacanik, Kamenice/Dardana (Kamenica), Kline (Klina), Leposaviq
(Leposavic), Lipjan (Lipljan), Malisheve (Malisevo), Mitrovice
(Mitrovica), Novoberde (Novo Brdo), Obiliq (Obilic), Peje (Pec),
Podujeve (Podujevo), Prishtine (Pristina), Prizren, Rahovec
(Orahovac), Shterpce (Strpce), Shtime (Stimlje), Skenderaj (Srbica),
Suhareke (Suva Reka), Viti (Vitina), Vushtrri (Vucitrn), Zubin
Potok, Zvecan

note - the Government of Kosovo has announced the establishment of
eight additional municipalities in accordance with UN Special Envoy
AHTISAARI's mandated decentralization process; the boundaries of
several municipalities are pending final approval; the
municipalities are: Gracanice (Gracanica), Hani i Elezit (Dzeneral
Jankovic), Junik, Kllokot-Verboc (Klokot-Vrbovac), Mamushe (Mamusa),
Partes, and Ranillug (Ranilug); in addition, the current Mitrovice
(Mitrovica) municipality is to be split into Mitrovice (Mitrovica)
North and Mitrovice (Mitrovica) South



Independence:


17 February 2008 (from Serbia)



National holiday:


Independence Day, 17 February (2008)



Constitution:


adopted by the Kosovo Assembly on 9 April 2008; effective 15 June
2008



Legal system:


evolving legal system based on terms of former UN Special Envoy
Martti AHTISAARI's Plan for Kosovo's supervised independence; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal



Executive branch:


chief of state: Acting President Jakup KRASNIQI (since 27 September
2010)

head of government: Prime Minister Hashim THACI (since 9 January
2008)

cabinet: ministers; elected by the Kosovo Assembly
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the president elected for a five-year term by the Kosovo
Assembly; election last held on 9 January 2008 (next to be held - a
special election in 2011); the prime minister elected by the Kosovo
Assembly

election results: Fatmir SEJDIU reelected president after three
rounds; note - resigned from the office of president on 27
Septermber 2010; Hashim THACI elected prime minister by the Assembly



Legislative branch:


unicameral national Assembly (120 seats; 100 seats directly elected,
10 seats guaranteed for ethnic Serbs, 10 seats guaranteed for other
ethnic minorities; members to serve four-year terms)

elections: last held on 17 November 2007 (next expected to be held
in 2011)

election results: percent of vote by party - PDK 34.3%, LDK 22.6%,
AKR 12.3%, LDD 10.0%, AAK 9.6%, other 11.2%; seats by party - PDK
37, LDK 25, AKR 13, LDD 11, AAK 10, other 4



Judicial branch:


Supreme Court; district courts; municipal courts

note: the Kosovo Constitution dictates that the Supreme Court of
Kosovo is the highest judicial authority, and provides for a Kosovo
Judicial Council (KJC) that proposes to the president candidates for
appointment or reappointment as judges and prosecutors; the KJC is
also responsible for decisions on the promotion and transfer of
judges and disciplinary proceedings against judges; at least 15
percent of Supreme Court and district court judges shall be from
non-majority communities



Political parties and leaders:


Albanian Christian Democratic Party of Kosovo or PShDK [Ton MARKU];
Alliance for a New Kosovo or AKR [Behgjet PACOLLI]; Alliance for the
Future of Kosovo or AAK [Ramush HARADINAJ]; Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats of Kosovo and Metohija or SDSKIM [Ljubisa ZIVIC];
Bosniak Vakat Coalition or DSV [Sadik IDRIZI]; Citizens' Initiative
of Gora or GIG [Murselj HALJILJI]; Democratic Action Party or SDA
[Numan BALIC]; Democratic League of Dardania or LDD [Nexhat DACI];
Democratic League of Kosovo or LDK [Fatmir SEJDIU]; Democratic Party
of Ashkali of Kosovo or PDAK [Berat QERIMI]; Democratic Party of
Bosniaks [Dzezair MURATI]; Democratic Party of Kosovo or PDK [Hashim
THACI]; Independent Liberal Party or SLS [Slobadan PETROVIC]; Kosovo
Democratic Turkish Party of KDTP [Mahir YAGCILAR]; New Democratic
Initiative of Kosovo or IRDK [Xhevdet NEZIRAJ]; New Democratic Party
or ND [Predrag JOVIC]; New Kosovo Alliance or AKR [Behxhet PACOLLI];
Reform Party Ora [Teuta SAHATCIA]; Serb National Party or SNS
[Mihailo SCEPANOVIC]; Serbian Democratic Party of Kosovo and
Metohija or SDS KiM [Slavisa PETKOVIC]; Serbian Kosovo and Metohija
Party or SKMS [Dragisa MIRIC]; Serbian National Council of Northern
Kosovo and Metohija or SNV [Milan IVANOVIC]; Social Democratic Party
of Kosovo or PSDK [Agim CEKU]; Socialist Party of Kosovo or PSK
[Emrush XHEMAJLI]; United Roma Party of Kosovo or PREBK [Haxhi Zylfi
MERXHA]



Political pressure groups and leaders:


Council for the Defense of Human Rights and Freedom (human rights);
Humanitarian Law Centre (human rights); Movement for
Self-Determination; Serb National Council (SNV)



International organization participation:


IBRD, IDA, IFC, IMF, ITUC, MIGA



Diplomatic representation in the US:


chief of mission: Ambassador Avni SPAHIU

chancery: 1101 30th Street NW, Suites 330/340, Washington, DC 20007

telephone: 202-380-3581

FAX: 202-380-3628

consulate(s) general: New York



Diplomatic representation from the US:


chief of mission: Ambassador Christopher William DELL

embassy: Arberia/Dragodan, Nazim Hikmet 30, Pristina, Kosovo

mailing address: use embassy street address

telephone: [381] 38 59 59 3000

FAX: [381] 38 549 890



Flag description:


centered on a dark blue field is the geographical shape of Kosovo in
a gold color surmounted by six white, five-pointed stars arrayed in
a slight arc; each star represents one of the major ethnic groups of
Kosovo: Albanians, Serbs, Turks, Gorani, Roma, and Bosniaks



National anthem:


name: "Europe"

lyrics/music: none/Mendi MENGJIQI

note: adopted 2008; Kosovo chose to not include lyrics in its anthem
so as not to offend minority ethnic groups in the country







Economy ::Kosovo




Economy - overview:


Over the past few years Kosovo's economy has shown significant
progress in transitioning to a market-based system and maintaining
macroeconomic stability, but it is still highly dependent on the
international community and the diaspora for financial and technical
assistance. Remittances from the diaspora - located mainly in
Germany and Switzerland - are estimated to account for about 14% of
GDP, and donor-financed activities and aid for another 7.5%.
Kosovo's citizens are the poorest in Europe with an average annual
per capita income of only $2,500. Unemployment, around 40% of the
population, is a significant problem that encourages outward
migration and black market activity. Most of Kosovo's population
lives in rural towns outside of the capital, Pristina. Inefficient,
near-subsistence farming is common - the result of small plots,
limited mechanization, and lack of technical expertise. With
international assistance, Kosovo has been able to privatize 50% of
its state-owned enterprises (SOEs) by number, and over 90% of SOEs
by value. Minerals and metals - including lignite, lead, zinc,
nickel, chrome, aluminum, magnesium, and a wide variety of
construction materials - once formed the backbone of industry, but
output has declined because of ageing equipment and insufficient
investment. A limited and unreliable electricity supply due to
technical and financial problems is a major impediment to economic
development. Kosovo's Ministry of Energy and Mining has solicited
expressions of interest from private investors to develop a new
power plant in order to address Kosovo and the region's unmet and
growing demands for power. The official currency of Kosovo is the
euro, but the Serbian dinar is also used in Serb enclaves. Kosovo's
tie to the euro has helped keep core inflation low. Kosovo has one
of the most open economies in the region, and continues to work with
the international community on measures to improve the business
environment and attract foreign investment. Kosovo has kept the
government budget in balance as a result of efficient value added
tax (VAT) collection at the borders and inefficient budget
execution. In order to help integrate Kosovo into regional economic
structures, UNMIK signed (on behalf of Kosovo) its accession to the
Central Europe Free Trade Area (CEFTA) in 2006. However, Serbia and
Bosnia have refused to recognize Kosovo's customs stamp or extend
reduced tariff privileges for Kosovo products under CEFTA. In July
2008, Kosovo received pledges of $1.9 billion from 37 countries in
support of its reform priorities. In June 2009, Kosovo joined the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund, and Kosovo began
servicing its share of the former Yugoslavia's debt.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$5.3 billion (2008); $4.7 billion
country comparison to the world: 158


GDP (official exchange rate):


$3.237 billion (2007 est.)



GDP - real growth rate:






GDP - per capita (PPP):


$2,500 (2007)
country comparison to the world: 174


GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: 12.9%

industry: 22.6%

services: 64.5% (2010 est.)



Labor force:


NA (2009 est.)



Labor force - by occupation:


agriculture: 16.5%

industry: NA

services: NA (2007 est.)



Unemployment rate:


16.6% (2009 est.); 14%
country comparison to the world: 157


Population below poverty line:


35% (2007 est.)



Distribution of family income - Gini index:


30 (FY05/06)



Investment (gross fixed):


15.2% of GDP (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 127


Public debt:


NA% of GDP



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


5.3% (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 150


Commercial bank prime lending rate:


14.09% (31 December 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 55
13.79% (31 December 2008 est.)



Agriculture - products:


wheat, corn, berries, potatoes, peppers



Industries:


mineral mining, construction materials, base metals, leather,
machinery, appliances



Electricity - production:


832 million kWh (2006)
country comparison to the world: 149


Electricity - consumption:


4.281 billion kWh (2006)
country comparison to the world: 115


Oil - production:


0 bbl/day (2007)
country comparison to the world: 158


Oil - consumption:


NA bbl/day



Oil - proved reserves:


NA bbl



Natural gas - production:


0 cu m (2007)
country comparison to the world: 169


Natural gas - consumption:


0 cu m (2007)
country comparison to the world: 123


Natural gas - proved reserves:


NA cu m



Current account balance:


-$2.716 billion (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 165
-$2.408 billion (2009 est.)



Exports:


$527 million (2007 est.)



Exports - commodities:


mining and processed metal products, scrap metals, leather products,
machinery, appliances



Imports:


$2.6 billion f.o.b. (2007 est.)



Imports - commodities:


foodstuffs, wood, petroleum, chemicals, machinery and electrical
equipment



Reserves of foreign exchange and gold:


$NA



Debt - external:


$NA



Stock of direct foreign investment - at home:


$21.2 billion (31 December 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 67
$21.32 billion (31 December 2009 est.)



Exchange rates:


euros (EUR) per US dollar - 0.7715 (2010), 0.7338 (2009), 0.6827
(2008), 0.7345 (2007)







Communications ::Kosovo




Telephones - main lines in use:


106,300 (2006)
country comparison to the world: 143


Telephones - mobile cellular:


562,000 (2007)
country comparison to the world: 157






Transportation ::Kosovo




Airports:


8 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 165


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 4

2,438 to 3,047 m: 1

1,524 to 2,437 m: 1

under 914 m: 2 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 4

under 914 m: 4 (2010)



Heliports:


2 (2010)



Railways:


total: 430 km
country comparison to the world: 116
standard gauge: 430 km 1.435-m gauge (2007)



Roadways:


total: 1,926 km
country comparison to the world: 175
paved: 1,668 km

unpaved: 258 km (2009)







Military ::Kosovo




Military branches:


Kosovo Security Force (2010)



Manpower fit for military service:


males age 16-49: 429,645

females age 16-49: 389,071 (2010 est.)







Transnational Issues ::Kosovo




Disputes - international:


Serbia with several other states protest the US and other states'
recognition of Kosovo's declaring itself as a sovereign and
independent state in February 2008; ethnic Serbian municipalities
along Kosovo's northern border challenge final status of
Kosovo-Serbia boundary; several thousand NATO-led KFOR peacekeepers
under UNMIK authority continue to keep the peace within Kosovo
between the ethnic Albanian majority and the Serb minority in
Kosovo; Kosovo and Macedonia completed demarcation of their boundary
in September 2008



Refugees and internally displaced persons:


IDP's: 21,000 (2007)









page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





