Navassa Island  (Central America and Caribbean)

Introduction ::Navassa Island




Background:


This uninhabited island was claimed by the US in 1857 for its guano.
Mining took place between 1865 and 1898. The lighthouse, built in
1917, was shut down in 1996 and administration of Navassa Island
transferred from the Coast Guard to the Department of the Interior.
A 1998 scientific expedition to the island described it as a unique
preserve of Caribbean biodiversity; the following year it became a
National Wildlife Refuge and annual scientific expeditions have
continued.







Geography ::Navassa Island




Location:


Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, 35 miles west of Tiburon
Peninsula of Haiti



Geographic coordinates:


18 25 N, 75 02 W



Map references:


Central America and the Caribbean



Area:


total: 5.4 sq km
country comparison to the world: 245
land: 5.4 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


about nine times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


8 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


marine, tropical



Terrain:


raised coral and limestone plateau, flat to undulating; ringed by
vertical white cliffs (9 to 15 m high)



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m

highest point: unnamed elevation on southwest side 77 m



Natural resources:


guano



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Natural hazards:


hurricanes



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


strategic location 160 km south of the US Naval Base at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba; mostly exposed rock with numerous solution holes but with
enough grassland to support goat herds; dense stands of fig trees,
scattered cactus







People ::Navassa Island




Population:


uninhabited

note: transient Haitian fishermen and others camp on the island







Government ::Navassa Island




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Navassa Island



Dependency status:


unorganized, unincorporated territory of the US; administered by the
Fish and Wildlife Service, US Department of the Interior from the
Caribbean Islands National Wildlife Refuge in Boqueron, Puerto Rico;
in September 1996 the Coast Guard ceased operations and maintenance
of Navassa Island Light a 46-meter-tall lighthouse on the southern
side of the island; there has also been a private claim advanced
against the island



Legal system:


the laws of the US where applicable apply



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (territory of the US)



Flag description:


the flag of the US is used







Economy ::Navassa Island




Economy - overview:


Subsistence fishing and commercial trawling occur within refuge
waters.







Communications ::Navassa Island




Broadcast media:


no television or radio broadcast stations (2009)







Transportation ::Navassa Island




Ports and terminals:


none; offshore anchorage only







Military ::Navassa Island




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the US







Transnational Issues ::Navassa Island




Disputes - international:


claimed by Haiti, source of subsistence fishing









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





