Niue  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Niue




Background:


Niue's remoteness, as well as cultural and linguistic differences
between its Polynesian inhabitants and those of the rest of the Cook
Islands, have caused it to be separately administered. The
population of the island continues to drop (from a peak of 5,200 in
1966 to an estimated 1,398 in 2009) with substantial emigration to
New Zealand 2,400 km to the southwest.







Geography ::Niue




Location:


Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, east of Tonga



Geographic coordinates:


19 02 S, 169 52 W



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 260 sq km
country comparison to the world: 212
land: 260 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


1.5 times the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


64 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical; modified by southeast trade winds



Terrain:


steep limestone cliffs along coast, central plateau



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point: unnamed elevation near Mutalau settlement 68 m



Natural resources:


fish, arable land



Land use:


arable land: 11.54%

permanent crops: 15.38%

other: 73.08% (2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


typhoons



Environment - current issues:


increasing attention to conservationist practices to counter loss of
soil fertility from traditional slash and burn agriculture



Environment - international agreements:


party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection



Geography - note:


one of world's largest coral islands







People ::Niue




Population:


1,354 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 235


Age structure:


0-14 years: NA

15-64 years: NA

65 years and over: NA (2009 est.)



Population growth rate:


-0.032% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 201


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Urbanization:


urban population: 39% of total population (2008)

rate of urbanization: -0.2% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)



Sex ratio:


NA



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Niuean(s)

adjective: Niuean



Ethnic groups:


Niuen 78.2%, Pacific islander 10.2%, European 4.5%, mixed 3.9%,
Asian 0.2%, unspecified 3% (2001 census)



Religions:


Ekalesia Niue (Niuean Church - a Protestant church closely related
to the London Missionary Society) 61.1%, Latter-Day Saints 8.8%,
Roman Catholic 7.2%, Jehovah's Witnesses 2.4%, Seventh-Day Adventist
1.4%, other 8.4%, unspecified 8.7%, none 1.9% (2001 census)



Languages:


English (official), Niuean a Polynesian language closely related to
Tongan and Samoan; English



Literacy:


definition: NA

total population: 95%

male: NA

female: NA



School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education):


total: 12 years

male: 12 years

female: 12 years (2005)



Education expenditures:


NA







Government ::Niue




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Niue

note: pronunciation falls between nyu-way and new-way, but not like
new-wee

former: Savage Island



Dependency status:


self-governing in free association with New Zealand since 1974; Niue
fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand retains
responsibility for external affairs and defense; however, these
responsibilities confer no rights of control and are only exercised
at the request of the Government of Niue



Government type:


self-governing parliamentary democracy



Capital:


name: Alofi

geographic coordinates: 19 01 S, 169 55 W

time difference: UTC-11 (6 hours behind Washington, DC during
Standard Time)



Administrative divisions:


none; note - there are no first-order administrative divisions as
defined by the US Government, but there are 14 villages at the
second order



Independence:


19 October 1974 (Niue became a self-governing parliamentary
government in free association with New Zealand)



National holiday:


Waitangi Day (Treaty of Waitangi established British sovereignty
over New Zealand), 6 February (1840)



Constitution:


19 October 1974 (Niue Constitution Act)



Legal system:


English common law; note - Niue is self-governing with the power to
make its laws



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952);
represented by Governor General of New Zealand Anand SATYANAND
(since 23 August 2006); the UK and New Zealand are represented by
New Zealand High Commissioner John BRYAN (since May 2000)

head of government: Premier Toke TALAGI (since 18 June 2008)

cabinet: Cabinet consists of the premier and 3 ministers
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the monarchy is hereditary; premier elected by the
Legislative Assembly for a three-year term; election last held on 18
June 2008 (next to be held in 2011)

election results: Toke TALAGI defeats incumbent Young VIVIAN in
Legislative Assembly vote; Toke TALAGI - 14, Young VIVIAN - 5



Legislative branch:


unicameral Legislative Assembly (20 seats; members elected by
popular vote to serve three-year terms; six elected from a common
roll and 14 are village representatives)

elections: last held on 7 June 2008 (next to be held in 2011)

election results: percent of vote by party - NA; seats by party - 20
independents



Judicial branch:


Supreme Court of New Zealand; High Court of Niue



Political parties and leaders:


Alliance of Independents or AI; Niue People's Action Party or NPP
[Young VIVIAN]



Political pressure groups and leaders:


NA



International organization participation:


ACP, AOSIS, FAO, IFAD, OPCW, PIF, Sparteca, SPC, UNESCO, UPU, WHO,
WMO



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand)



Flag description:


yellow with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant; the
flag of the UK bears five yellow five-pointed stars - a large star
on a blue disk in the center and a smaller star on each arm of the
bold red cross; the larger star stands for Niue, the smaller stars
recall the Southern Cross constellation on the New Zealand flag and
symbolize links with that country; yellow represents the bright
sunshine of Niue and the warmth and friendship between Niue and New
Zealand



National anthem:


name: "Ko e Iki he Lagi" (The Lord in Heaven)

lyrics/music: unknown/unknown, prepared by Sioeli FUSIKATA

note: adopted 1974







Economy ::Niue




Economy - overview:


The economy suffers from the typical Pacific island problems of
geographic isolation, few resources, and a small population.
Government expenditures regularly exceed revenues, and the shortfall
is made up by critically needed grants from New Zealand that are
used to pay wages to public employees. Niue has cut government
expenditures by reducing the public service by almost half. The
agricultural sector consists mainly of subsistence gardening,
although some cash crops are grown for export. Industry consists
primarily of small factories to process passion fruit, lime oil,
honey, and coconut cream. The sale of postage stamps to foreign
collectors is an important source of revenue. The island in recent
years has suffered a serious loss of population because of
emigration to New Zealand. Efforts to increase GDP include the
promotion of tourism and financial services, although the
International Banking Repeal Act of 2002 resulted in the termination
of all offshore banking licenses. Economic aid from New Zealand in
FY08/09 was US$5.7 million. Niue suffered a devastating typhoon in
January 2004, which decimated nascent economic programs. While in
the process of rebuilding, Niue has been dependent on foreign aid.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$10.01 million (2003 est.)
country comparison to the world: 227


GDP (official exchange rate):


$10.01 million (2003)



GDP - real growth rate:


6.2% (2003 est.)
country comparison to the world: 33


GDP - per capita (PPP):


$5,800 (2003 est.)
country comparison to the world: 139


GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: 23.5%

industry: 26.9%

services: 49.5% (2003)



Labor force:


663 (2001)
country comparison to the world: 227


Labor force - by occupation:


note: most work on family plantations; paid work exists only in
government service, small industry, and the Niue Development Board



Unemployment rate:


12% (2001)
country comparison to the world: 128


Population below poverty line:


NA%



Household income or consumption by percentage share:


lowest 10%: NA%

highest 10%: NA%



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


4% (2005)
country comparison to the world: 116


Agriculture - products:


coconuts, passion fruit, honey, limes, taro, yams, cassava
(tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, poultry, beef cattle



Industries:


handicrafts, food processing



Industrial production growth rate:


NA%



Electricity - production:


3 million kWh (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 211


Electricity - consumption:


2.79 million kWh (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 212


Electricity - exports:


0 kWh (2008 est.)



Electricity - imports:


0 kWh (2008 est.)



Oil - production:


0 bbl/day (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 150


Oil - consumption:


NA bbl/day (2009 est.)



Oil - exports:


0 bbl/day (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 157


Oil - imports:


31 bbl/day (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 203


Oil - proved reserves:


0 bbl (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 147


Natural gas - production:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 153


Natural gas - consumption:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 118


Natural gas - exports:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 147


Natural gas - imports:


0 cu m (2008 est.)
country comparison to the world: 108


Natural gas - proved reserves:


0 cu m (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 113


Exports:


$201,400 (2004)
country comparison to the world: 220


Exports - commodities:


canned coconut cream, copra, honey, vanilla, passion fruit products,
pawpaws, root crops, limes, footballs, stamps, handicrafts



Imports:


$9.038 million (2004)
country comparison to the world: 221


Imports - commodities:


food, live animals, manufactured goods, machinery, fuels,
lubricants, chemicals, drugs



Debt - external:


$418,000 (2002 est.)
country comparison to the world: 194


Exchange rates:


New Zealand dollars (NZD) per US dollar - 1.4015 (2010), 1.6002
(2009), 1.4151 (2008), 1.3811 (2007), 1.5408 (2006)







Communications ::Niue




Telephones - main lines in use:


1,100 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 227


Telephones - mobile cellular:


600 (2004)
country comparison to the world: 219


Telephone system:


domestic: single-line telephone system connects all villages on
island

international: country code - 683 (2001)



Broadcast media:


1 government-owned television station with many of the programs
supplied by Television New Zealand; 1 government-owned radio station
broadcasting in AM and FM (2009)



Internet country code:


.nu



Internet hosts:


397,270 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 52


Internet users:


1,100 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 213






Transportation ::Niue




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 229


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (2010)



Roadways:


total: 120 km
country comparison to the world: 212
paved: 120 km (2008)



Ports and terminals:


Alofi







Military ::Niue




Military branches:


no regular indigenous military forces; Police Force



Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of New Zealand







Transnational Issues ::Niue




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





