Pitcairn Islands  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Pitcairn Islands




Background:


Pitcairn Island was discovered in 1767 by the British and settled in
1790 by the Bounty mutineers and their Tahitian companions. Pitcairn
was the first Pacific island to become a British colony (in 1838)
and today remains the last vestige of that empire in the South
Pacific. Outmigration, primarily to New Zealand, has thinned the
population from a peak of 233 in 1937 to less than 50 today.







Geography ::Pitcairn Islands




Location:


Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about midway between
Peru and New Zealand



Geographic coordinates:


25 04 S, 130 06 W



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 47 sq km
country comparison to the world: 233
land: 47 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


51 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 3 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical; hot and humid; modified by southeast trade winds; rainy
season (November to March)



Terrain:


rugged volcanic formation; rocky coastline with cliffs



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point: Big Ridge 347 m



Natural resources:


miro trees (used for handicrafts), fish

note: manganese, iron, copper, gold, silver, and zinc have been
discovered offshore



Land use:


arable land: NA

permanent crops: NA

other: NA



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


typhoons (especially November to March)



Environment - current issues:


deforestation (only a small portion of the original forest remains
because of burning and clearing for settlement)



Geography - note:


Britain's most isolated dependency; only the larger island of
Pitcairn is inhabited but it has no port or natural harbor; supplies
must be transported by rowed longboat from larger ships stationed
offshore







People ::Pitcairn Islands




Population:


48 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 238


Age structure:


0-14 years: NA

15-64 years: NA

65 years and over: NA (2009 est.)



Population growth rate:


0% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 198


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Urbanization:


urban population: 0% of total population (2008)

rate of urbanization: 0% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)



Sex ratio:


NA



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Pitcairn Islander(s)

adjective: Pitcairn Islander



Ethnic groups:


descendants of the Bounty mutineers and their Tahitian wives



Religions:


Seventh-Day Adventist 100%



Languages:


English (official), Pitkern (mixture of an 18th century English
dialect and a Tahitian dialect)



Literacy:


NA







Government ::Pitcairn Islands




Country name:


conventional long form: Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie, and Oeno Islands

conventional short form: Pitcairn Islands



Dependency status:


overseas territory of the UK



Government type:


NA



Capital:


name: Adamstown

geographic coordinates: 25 04 S, 130 05 W

time difference: UTC-9 (4 hours behind Washington, DC during
Standard Time)



Administrative divisions:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Independence:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



National holiday:


Birthday of Queen ELIZABETH II, second Saturday in June (1926)



Constitution:


The Pitcairn Constitution Order 2010, effective 4 March 2010



Legal system:


local island by-laws



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal with three years residency



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952);
represented by UK High Commissioner to New Zealand and Governor
(nonresident) of the Pitcairn Islands George FERGUSSON (since April
2006); Commissioner (nonresident) Leslie JAQUES (since September
2003) serves as liaison between the governor and the Island Council

head of government: Governor George FERGUSSON (since April 2006);
Mayor and Chairman of the Island Council Mike WARREN (since 1
January 2008)

cabinet: NA
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the monarchy is hereditary; governor and commissioner
appointed by the monarch; island mayor elected by popular vote for a
three-year term; election last held in December 2007 (next to be
held in December 2010)

election results: Mike WARREN elected mayor and chairman of the
Island Council



Legislative branch:


unicameral Island Council (11 seats; mayor, deputy mayor, 4 members
elected by popular vote, 1 member appointed by the governor, 3 ex
officio members including governor, deputy governor, and
commissioner; deputy mayor and elected members serve two-year terms)

elections: last held on 24 December 2009 (next to be held on 24
December 2011)

election results: percent of vote - NA; seats - all independents



Judicial branch:


Magistrate's Court; Supreme Court; Court of Appeal; judicial
officers are appointed by the governor



Political parties and leaders:


none



Political pressure groups and leaders:


none



International organization participation:


SPC, UPU



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK)



Flag description:


blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and
the Pitcairn Islander coat of arms centered on the outer half of the
flag; the green, yellow, and blue of the shield represents the
island rising from the ocean; the green field features a yellow
anchor surmounted by a bible (both the anchor and the bible were
items found on the HMS Bounty); sitting on the crest is a Pitcairn
Island wheelbarrow from which springs a slip of miro (a local plant)



National anthem:


name: "We From Pitcairn Island"

lyrics/music: unknown/Frederick M. LEHMAN

note: serves as a local anthem; as a territory of the United
Kingdom, "God Save the Queen" is official (see United Kingdom)







Economy ::Pitcairn Islands




Economy - overview:


The inhabitants of this tiny isolated economy exist on fishing,
subsistence farming, handicrafts, and postage stamps. The fertile
soil of the valleys produces a wide variety of fruits and
vegetables, including citrus, sugarcane, watermelons, bananas, yams,
and beans. Bartering is an important part of the economy. The major
sources of revenue are the sale of postage stamps to collectors and
the sale of handicrafts to passing ships. In October 2004, more than
one-quarter of Pitcairn's small labor force was arrested, putting
the economy in a bind, since their services were required as lighter
crew to load or unload passing ships.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$NA



Labor force:


15 able-bodied men (2004)
country comparison to the world: 229


Labor force - by occupation:


note: no business community in the usual sense; some public works;
subsistence farming and fishing



Agriculture - products:


honey; wide variety of fruits and vegetables; goats, chickens, fish



Industries:


postage stamps, handicrafts, beekeeping, honey



Electricity - production:


NA kWh; note - electric power is provided by a small diesel-powered
generator



Exports:


$NA



Exports - commodities:


fruits, vegetables, curios, stamps



Imports:


$NA



Imports - commodities:


fuel oil, machinery, building materials, flour, sugar, other
foodstuffs



Exchange rates:


New Zealand dollars (NZD) per US dollar - 1.4015 (2010), 1.6002
(2009), 1.4151 (2008), 1.3811 (2007), 1.5408 (2006)







Communications ::Pitcairn Islands




Telephones - main lines in use:


1 (there are 17 telephones on one party line); (2004)
country comparison to the world: 230


Telephone system:


general assessment: satellite phone services

domestic: domestic communication via radio (CB)

international: country code - 872; satellite earth station - 1
(Inmarsat)



Broadcast media:


no local broadcast television or radio stations (2009)



Internet country code:


.pn



Internet hosts:


20 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 218






Transportation ::Pitcairn Islands




Ports and terminals:


Adamstown (on Bounty Bay)







Military ::Pitcairn Islands




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the UK







Transnational Issues ::Pitcairn Islands




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





