Russia  (Central Asia)

Introduction ::Russia




Background:


Founded in the 12th century, the Principality of Muscovy, was able
to emerge from over 200 years of Mongol domination (13th-15th
centuries) and to gradually conquer and absorb surrounding
principalities. In the early 17th century, a new Romanov Dynasty
continued this policy of expansion across Siberia to the Pacific.
Under PETER I (ruled 1682-1725), hegemony was extended to the Baltic
Sea and the country was renamed the Russian Empire. During the 19th
century, more territorial acquisitions were made in Europe and Asia.
Defeat in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 contributed to the
Revolution of 1905, which resulted in the formation of a parliament
and other reforms. Repeated devastating defeats of the Russian army
in World War I led to widespread rioting in the major cities of the
Russian Empire and to the overthrow in 1917 of the imperial
household. The Communists under Vladimir LENIN seized power soon
after and formed the USSR. The brutal rule of Iosif STALIN (1928-53)
strengthened Communist rule and Russian dominance of the Soviet
Union at a cost of tens of millions of lives. The Soviet economy and
society stagnated in the following decades until General Secretary
Mikhail GORBACHEV (1985-91) introduced glasnost (openness) and
perestroika (restructuring) in an attempt to modernize Communism,
but his initiatives inadvertently released forces that by December
1991 splintered the USSR into Russia and 14 other independent
republics. Since then, Russia has shifted its post-Soviet democratic
ambitions in favor of a centralized semi-authoritarian state whose
legitimacy is buttressed, in part, by carefully managed national
elections, former President PUTIN's genuine popularity, and the
prudent management of Russia's windfall energy wealth. Russia has
severely disabled a Chechen rebel movement, although violence still
occurs throughout the North Caucasus.







Geography ::Russia




Location:


Northern Asia (the area west of the Urals is considered part of
Europe), bordering the Arctic Ocean, between Europe and the North
Pacific Ocean



Geographic coordinates:


60 00 N, 100 00 E



Map references:


Asia



Area:


total: 17,098,242 sq km
country comparison to the world: 1
land: 16,377,742 sq km

water: 720,500 sq km



Area - comparative:


approximately 1.8 times the size of the US



Land boundaries:


total: 20,241.5 km

border countries: Azerbaijan 284 km, Belarus 959 km, China
(southeast) 3,605 km, China (south) 40 km, Estonia 290 km, Finland
1,313 km, Georgia 723 km, Kazakhstan 6,846 km, North Korea 17.5 km,
Latvia 292 km, Lithuania (Kaliningrad Oblast) 227 km, Mongolia 3,441
km, Norway 196 km, Poland (Kaliningrad Oblast) 432 km, Ukraine 1,576
km



Coastline:


37,653 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

contiguous zone: 24 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm

continental shelf: 200 m depth or to the depth of exploitation



Climate:


ranges from steppes in the south through humid continental in much
of European Russia; subarctic in Siberia to tundra climate in the
polar north; winters vary from cool along Black Sea coast to frigid
in Siberia; summers vary from warm in the steppes to cool along
Arctic coast



Terrain:


broad plain with low hills west of Urals; vast coniferous forest and
tundra in Siberia; uplands and mountains along southern border
regions



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Caspian Sea -28 m

highest point: Gora El'brus 5,633 m



Natural resources:


wide natural resource base including major deposits of oil, natural
gas, coal, and many strategic minerals, reserves of rare earth
elements, timber

note: formidable obstacles of climate, terrain, and distance hinder
exploitation of natural resources



Land use:


arable land: 7.17%

permanent crops: 0.11%

other: 92.72% (2005)



Irrigated land:


46,000 sq km (2003)



Total renewable water resources:


4,498 cu km (1997)



Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):


total: 76.68 cu km/yr (19%/63%/18%)

per capita: 535 cu m/yr (2000)



Natural hazards:


permafrost over much of Siberia is a major impediment to
development; volcanic activity in the Kuril Islands; volcanoes and
earthquakes on the Kamchatka Peninsula; spring floods and
summer/autumn forest fires throughout Siberia and parts of European
Russia

volcanism: Russia experiences significant volcanic activity on the
Kamchatka Peninsula and Kuril Islands; the peninsula alone is home
to some 29 historically active volcanoes, with dozens more in the
Kuril Islands; Kliuchevskoi (elev. 4,835 m, 15,863 ft), which
erupted in 2007 and 2010, is Kamchatka's most active volcano;
Avachinsky and Koryaksky volcanoes, which pose a threat to the city
of Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, have been deemed "Decade Volcanoes" by
the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the
Earth's Interior, worthy of study due to their explosive history and
close proximity to human populations; other notable historically
active volcanoes include Bezymianny, Chikurachki, Ebeko, Gorely,
Grozny, Karymsky, Ketoi, Kronotsky, Ksudach, Medvezhia, Mutnovsky,
Sarychev Peak, Shiveluch, Tiatia, Tolbachik, and Zheltovsky



Environment - current issues:


air pollution from heavy industry, emissions of coal-fired electric
plants, and transportation in major cities; industrial, municipal,
and agricultural pollution of inland waterways and seacoasts;
deforestation; soil erosion; soil contamination from improper
application of agricultural chemicals; scattered areas of sometimes
intense radioactive contamination; groundwater contamination from
toxic waste; urban solid waste management; abandoned stocks of
obsolete pesticides



Environment - international agreements:


party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
Pollution-Sulfur 85, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling

signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulfur 94



Geography - note:


largest country in the world in terms of area but unfavorably
located in relation to major sea lanes of the world; despite its
size, much of the country lacks proper soils and climates (either
too cold or too dry) for agriculture; Mount El'brus is Europe's
tallest peak







People ::Russia




Population:


139,390,205 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 9


Age structure:


0-14 years: 14.8% (male 10,644,833/female 10,095,011)

15-64 years: 71.5% (male 48,004,040/female 52,142,313)

65 years and over: 13.7% (male 5,880,877/female 13,274,173) (2010
est.)



Median age:


total: 38.5 years

male: 35.3 years

female: 41.7 years (2010 est.)



Population growth rate:


-0.465% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 222


Birth rate:


11.11 births/1,000 population (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 175


Death rate:


16.04 deaths/1,000 population (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 6


Net migration rate:


0.28 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 67


Urbanization:


urban population: 73% of total population (2008)

rate of urbanization: -0.5% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)



Sex ratio:


at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female

15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female

65 years and over: 0.44 male(s)/female

total population: 0.85 male(s)/female (2010 est.)



Infant mortality rate:


total: 10.32 deaths/1,000 live births
country comparison to the world: 150
male: 11.83 deaths/1,000 live births

female: 8.71 deaths/1,000 live births (2010 est.)



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: 66.16 years
country comparison to the world: 160
male: 59.54 years

female: 73.17 years (2010 est.)



Total fertility rate:


1.41 children born/woman (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 199


HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


1.1% (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 52


HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


940,000 (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 13


HIV/AIDS - deaths:


40,000 (2007 est.)
country comparison to the world: 13


Major infectious diseases:


degree of risk: intermediate

food or waterborne diseases: bacterial diarrhea

vectorborne disease: tickborne encephalitis

note: highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza has been identified in
this country; it poses a negligible risk with extremely rare cases
possible among US citizens who have close contact with birds (2009)



Nationality:


noun: Russian(s)

adjective: Russian



Ethnic groups:


Russian 79.8%, Tatar 3.8%, Ukrainian 2%, Bashkir 1.2%, Chuvash 1.1%,
other or unspecified 12.1% (2002 census)



Religions:


Russian Orthodox 15-20%, Muslim 10-15%, other Christian 2% (2006
est.)

note: estimates are of practicing worshipers; Russia has large
populations of non-practicing believers and non-believers, a legacy
of over seven decades of Soviet rule



Languages:


Russian (official), many minority languages



Literacy:


definition: age 15 and over can read and write

total population: 99.4%

male: 99.7%

female: 99.2% (2002 census)



School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education):


total: 14 years

male: 14 years

female: 15 years (2008)



Education expenditures:


3.9% of GDP (2006)
country comparison to the world: 109






Government ::Russia




Country name:


conventional long form: Russian Federation

conventional short form: Russia

local long form: Rossiyskaya Federatsiya

local short form: Rossiya

former: Russian Empire, Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic



Government type:


federation



Capital:


name: Moscow

geographic coordinates: 55 45 N, 37 35 E

time difference: UTC+3 (8 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins last Sunday in March; ends last
Sunday in October

note: Russia is divided into 9 time zones



Administrative divisions:


46 oblasts (oblastey, singular - oblast), 21 republics (respublik,
singular - respublika), 4 autonomous okrugs (avtonomnykh okrugov,
singular - avtonomnyy okrug), 9 krays (krayev, singular - kray), 2
federal cities (goroda, singular - gorod), and 1 autonomous oblast
(avtonomnaya oblast')

oblasts: Amur (Blagoveshchensk), Arkhangel'sk, Astrakhan', Belgorod,
Bryansk, Chelyabinsk, Irkutsk, Ivanovo, Kaliningrad, Kaluga,
Kemerovo, Kirov, Kostroma, Kurgan, Kursk, Leningrad, Lipetsk,
Magadan, Moscow, Murmansk, Nizhniy Novgorod, Novgorod, Novosibirsk,
Omsk, Orenburg, Orel, Penza, Pskov, Rostov, Ryazan', Sakhalin
(Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk), Samara, Saratov, Smolensk, Sverdlovsk
(Yekaterinburg), Tambov, Tomsk, Tula, Tver', Tyumen', Ul'yanovsk,
Vladimir, Volgograd, Vologda, Voronezh, Yaroslavl'

republics: Adygeya (Maykop), Altay (Gorno-Altaysk), Bashkortostan
(Ufa), Buryatiya (Ulan-Ude), Chechnya (Groznyy), Chuvashiya
(Cheboksary), Dagestan (Makhachkala), Ingushetiya (Magas),
Kabardino-Balkariya (Nal'chik), Kalmykiya (Elista),
Karachayevo-Cherkesiya (Cherkessk), Kareliya (Petrozavodsk),
Khakasiya (Abakan), Komi (Syktyvkar), Mariy-El (Yoshkar-Ola),
Mordoviya (Saransk), North Ossetia (Vladikavkaz), Sakha [Yakutiya]
(Yakutsk), Tatarstan (Kazan'), Tyva (Kyzyl), Udmurtiya (Izhevsk)

autonomous okrugs: Chukotka (Anadyr'), Khanty-Mansi
(Khanty-Mansiysk), Nenets (Nar'yan-Mar), Yamalo-Nenets (Salekhard)

krays: Altay (Barnaul), Kamchatka (Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy),
Khabarovsk, Krasnodar, Krasnoyarsk, Perm', Primorskiy [Maritime]
(Vladivostok), Stavropol', Zabaykal'sk (Chita)

federal cities: Moscow [Moskva], Saint Petersburg [Sankt-Peterburg]

autonomous oblast: Yevrey [Jewish] (Birobidzhan)

note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
name following in parentheses)



Independence:


24 August 1991 (from the Soviet Union); notable earlier dates: 1157
(Principality of Vladimir-Suzdal created); 16 January 1547 (Tsardom
of Muscovy established); 22 October 1721 (Russian Empire
proclaimed); 30 December 1922 (Soviet Union established)



National holiday:


Russia Day, 12 June (1990)



Constitution:


adopted 12 December 1993



Legal system:


based on civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts; has
not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction



Suffrage:


18 years of age; universal



Executive branch:


chief of state: President Dmitriy Anatolyevich MEDVEDEV (since 7 May
2008)

head of government: Premier Vladimir Vladimirovich PUTIN (since 8
May 2008); First Deputy Premiers Igor Ivanovich SHUVALOV and Viktor
Alekseyevich ZUBKOV (since 12 May 2008); Deputy Premiers Sergey
Borisovich IVANOV (since 12 May 2008), Aleksandr Gennadiyevich
KHLOPONIN (since 19 January 2010), Dmitriy Nikolayevich KOZAK (since
14 October 2008), Aleksey Leonidovich KUDRIN (since 24 September
2007), Igor Ivanovich SECHIN (since 12 May 2008), Vyacheslav
Viktorovich VOLODIN (since 21 October 2010), Aleksandr Dmitriyevich
ZHUKOV (since 9 March 2004)

cabinet: the "Government" is composed of the premier, his deputies,
and ministers; all are appointed by the president, and the premier
is also confirmed by the Duma
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
note: there is also a Presidential Administration (PA) that provides
staff and policy support to the president, drafts presidential
decrees, and coordinates policy among government agencies; a
Security Council also reports directly to the president

elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term
(eligible for a second term); election last held 2 March 2008 (next
to be held in March 2012); note - the term length was extended to
six years in late 2008, to go into effect following the 2012
presidential election; there is no vice president; if the president
dies in office, cannot exercise his powers because of ill health, is
impeached, or resigns, the premier serves as acting president until
a new presidential election is held, which must be within three
months; premier appointed by the president with the approval of the
Duma

election results: Dmitriy MEDVEDEV elected president; percent of
vote - Dmitriy MEDVEDEV 70.2%, Gennady ZYUGANOV 17.7%, Vladimir
ZHIRINOVSKY 9.4%, Andrey BOGDANOV 1.3%



Legislative branch:


bicameral Federal Assembly or Federalnoye Sobraniye consists of an
upper house, the Federation Council or Sovet Federatsii (166 seats;
as of July 2000, members appointed by the top executive and
legislative officials in each of the 83 federal administrative units
- oblasts, krays, republics, autonomous okrugs and oblasts, and the
federal cities of Moscow and Saint Petersburg; members to serve
four-year terms) and a lower house, the State Duma or
Gosudarstvennaya Duma (450 seats; as of 2007, all members elected by
proportional representation from party lists winning at least 7% of
the vote; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)

elections: State Duma - last held on 2 December 2007 (next to be
held in December 2011)

election results: State Duma - United Russia 64.3%, CPRF 11.5%, LDPR
8.1%, Just Russia 7.7%, other 8.4%; total seats by party - United
Russia 315, CPRF 57, LDPR 40, Just Russia 38



Judicial branch:


Constitutional Court; Supreme Court; Supreme Arbitration Court;
judges for all courts are appointed for life by the Federation
Council on the recommendation of the president



Political parties and leaders:


A Just Russia [Sergey MIRONOV]; Communist Party of the Russian
Federation or CPRF [Gennadiy Andreyevich ZYUGANOV]; Liberal
Democratic Party of Russia or LDPR [Vladimir Volfovich
ZHIRINOVSKIY]; Patriots of Russia [Gennadiy SEMIGIN]; Right Cause
[Leonid Yakovlevich GOZMAN, Boris Yuriyevich TITOV, and Georgiy
Georgiyevich BOVT] (formed from merger of Civic Force, Democratic
Party of Russia, and Union of Right Forces); United Russia [Vladimir
Vladimirovich PUTIN]; Yabloko Party [Sergey Sergeyevich MITROKHIN]



Political pressure groups and leaders:


Association of Citizens with Initiative of Russia (TIGR);
Confederation of Labor of Russia (KTR); Federation of Independent
Labor Unions of Russia; Freedom of Choice Interregional Organization
of Automobilists; Glasnost Defense Foundation; Golos Association in
Defense of Voters' Rights; Greenpeace Russia; Human Rights Watch
(Russian chapter); Institute for Collective Action; Memorial (human
rights group); Movement Against Illegal Migration; Pamjat
(preservation of historical monuments and recording of history);
Russian Orthodox Church; Russian Federation of Car Owners;
Russian-Chechen Friendship Society; SOVA Analytical-Information
Center; Union of the Committees of Soldiers' Mothers; World Wildlife
Fund (Russian chapter)



International organization participation:


APEC, Arctic Council, ARF, ASEAN (dialogue partner), BIS, BSEC,
CBSS, CE, CERN (observer), CICA, CIS, CSTO, EAEC, EAPC, EBRD, FAO,
FATF, G-20, G-8, GCTU, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS,
IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, IMSO, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), IPU, ISO,
ITSO, ITU, ITUC, LAIA (observer), MIGA, MINURSO, MONUSCO, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD (accession state), OIC (observer), OPCW, OSCE,
Paris Club, PCA, PFP, SCO, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIL, UNMIS, UNOCI, UNTSO, UNWTO, UPU, WCO,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO (observer), ZC



Diplomatic representation in the US:


chief of mission: Ambassador Sergey Ivanovich KISLYAK

chancery: 2650 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

telephone: [1] (202) 298-5700, 5701, 5704, 5708

FAX: [1] (202) 298-5735

consulate(s) general: Houston, New York, San Francisco, Seattle



Diplomatic representation from the US:


chief of mission: Ambassador John R. BEYRLE

embassy: Bolshoy Deviatinskiy Pereulok No. 8, 121099 Moscow

mailing address: PSC-77, APO AE 09721

telephone: [7] (495) 728-5000

FAX: [7] (495) 728-5090

consulate(s) general: Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok, Yekaterinburg



Flag description:


three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red

note: the colors may have been based on those of the Dutch flag;
despite many popular interpretations, there is no official meaning
assigned to the colors of the Russian flag; this flag inspired other
Slav countries to adopt horizontal tricolors of the same colors but
in different arrangements, and so red, blue, and white became the
Pan-Slav colors



National anthem:


name: "Gimn Rossiyskoy Federatsii" (National Anthem of the Russian
Federation)

lyrics/music: Sergei Vladimirovich MIKHALKOV/Alexandr Vasilievich
ALEXANDROV

note: in 2000, Russia adopted the tune of the anthem of the former
Soviet Union (composed in 1939); the lyrics, also adopted in 2000,
were written by the same person who authored the Soviet lyrics in
1943







Economy ::Russia




Economy - overview:


Russia has undergone significant changes since the collapse of the
Soviet Union, moving from a globally-isolated, centrally-planned
economy to a more market-based and globally-integrated economy.
Economic reforms in the 1990s privatized most industry, with notable
exceptions in the energy and defense-related sectors. The protection
of property rights is still weak and the private sector remains
subject to heavy state interference. Russian industry is primarily
split between globally-competitive commodity producers - in 2009
Russia was the world's largest exporter of natural gas, the second
largest exporter of oil, and the third largest exporter of steel and
primary aluminum - and other less competitive heavy industries that
remain dependent on the Russian domestic market. This reliance on
commodity exports makes Russia vulnerable to boom and bust cycles
that follow the highly volatile swings in global commodity prices.
The government since 2007 has embarked on an ambitious program to
reduce this dependency and build up the country's high technology
sectors, but with few results so far. The economy had averaged 7%
growth since the 1998 Russian financial crisis, resulting in a
doubling of real disposable incomes and the emergence of a middle
class. The Russian economy, however, was one of the hardest hit by
the 2008-09 global economic crisis as oil prices plummeted and the
foreign credits that Russian banks and firms relied on dried up. The
Central Bank of Russia spent one-third of its $600 billion
international reserves, the world's third largest, in late 2008 to
slow the devaluation of the ruble. The government also devoted $200
billion in a rescue plan to increase liquidity in the banking sector
and aid Russian firms unable to roll over large foreign debts coming
due. The economic decline bottomed out in mid-2009 and the economy
began to grow in the first quarter of 2010. However, a severe
drought and fires in central Russia reduced agricultural output,
prompting a ban on grain exports for part of the year, and slowed
growth in other sectors such as manufacturing and retail trade.
Russia's long-term challenges include a shrinking workforce, a high
level of corruption, difficulty in accessing capital for smaller,
non-energy companies, and poor infrastructure in need of large
investments.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$2.229 trillion (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 7
$2.147 trillion (2009 est.)

$2.331 trillion (2008 est.)

note: data are in 2010 US dollars



GDP (official exchange rate):


$1.477 trillion (2010 est.)



GDP - real growth rate:


3.8% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 88
-7.9% (2009)

5.2% (2008)



GDP - per capita (PPP):


$15,900 (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 71
$15,300 (2009 est.)

$16,600 (2008 est.)

note: data are in 2010 US dollars



GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: 4.2%

industry: 33.8%

services: 62% (2010 est.)



Labor force:


75.55 million (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 7


Labor force - by occupation:


agriculture: 10%

industry: 31.9%

services: 58.1% (2008)



Unemployment rate:


7.6% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 83
8.4% (2009)



Population below poverty line:


13.1% (2009)



Household income or consumption by percentage share:


lowest 10%: 1.9%

highest 10%: 30.4% (September 2007)



Distribution of family income - Gini index:


42.2 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 53
39.9 (2001)



Investment (gross fixed):


18.9% of GDP (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 99


Public debt:


9.5% of GDP (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 123
8.3% of GDP (2009 est.)



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


6.7% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 172
11.7% (2009)



Central bank discount rate:


8.75% (31 December 2009)
country comparison to the world: 28
13% (31 December 2008)



Commercial bank prime lending rate:


15.31% (31 December 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 72
12.23% (31 December 2008 est.)



Stock of narrow money:


$269.1 billion (31 December 2010 est)
country comparison to the world: 16
$203.7 billion (31 December 2009 est)



Stock of broad money:


$650.7 billion (31 December 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 20
$645.5 billion (31 December 2009)



Stock of domestic credit:


$549.9 billion (31 December 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 24
$420.4 billion (31 December 2009 est.)



Market value of publicly traded shares:


$861.4 billion (31 December 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 7
$1.322 trillion (31 December 2008)

$1.503 trillion (31 December 2007 est.)



Agriculture - products:


grain, sugar beets, sunflower seed, vegetables, fruits; beef, milk



Industries:


complete range of mining and extractive industries producing coal,
oil, gas, chemicals, and metals; all forms of machine building from
rolling mills to high-performance aircraft and space vehicles;
defense industries including radar, missile production, and advanced
electronic components, shipbuilding; road and rail transportation
equipment; communications equipment; agricultural machinery,
tractors, and construction equipment; electric power generating and
transmitting equipment; medical and scientific instruments; consumer
durables, textiles, foodstuffs, handicrafts



Industrial production growth rate:


8.3% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 25


Electricity - production:


925.9 billion kWh (2009)
country comparison to the world: 5


Electricity - consumption:


857.6 billion kWh (2009)
country comparison to the world: 5


Electricity - exports:


17.7 billion kWh (2009 est.)



Electricity - imports:


3.066 billion kWh (2009)



Oil - production:


10.12 million bbl/day (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 1


Oil - consumption:


2.74 million bbl/day (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 6


Oil - exports:


5.43 million bbl/day (2009)
country comparison to the world: 2


Oil - imports:


42,000 bbl/day (2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 94


Oil - proved reserves:


74.2 billion bbl (1 January 2009 est.)
country comparison to the world: 8


Natural gas - production:


583.6 billion cu m (2009)
country comparison to the world: 2


Natural gas - consumption:


439.6 billion cu m (2009)
country comparison to the world: 3


Natural gas - exports:


179.1 billion cu m (2009)
country comparison to the world: 1


Natural gas - imports:


35.1 billion cu m (2009)
country comparison to the world: 8


Natural gas - proved reserves:


47.57 trillion cu m (1 January 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 1


Current account balance:


$68.85 billion (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 4
$48.97 billion (2009 est.)



Exports:


$376.7 billion (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 13
$303.4 billion (2009 est.)



Exports - commodities:


petroleum and petroleum products, natural gas, metals, wood and wood
products, chemicals, and a wide variety of civilian and military
manufactures



Exports - partners:


Netherlands 10.62%, Italy 6.46%, Germany 6.24%, China 5.69%, Turkey
4.3%, Ukraine 4.01% (2009)



Imports:


$237.3 billion (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 19
$191.8 billion (2009 est.)



Imports - commodities:


machinery, vehicles, pharmaceutical products, plastic, semi-finished
metal products, meat, fruits and nuts, optical and medical
instruments, iron, steel



Imports - partners:


Germany 14.39%, China 13.98%, Ukraine 5.48%, Italy 4.84%, US 4.46%
(2009)



Reserves of foreign exchange and gold:


$483.1 billion (30 November 2010)
country comparison to the world: 2
$439.4 billion (31 December 2009)



Debt - external:


$480.2 billion (30 November 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 21
$467.2 billion (31 December 2009)



Stock of direct foreign investment - at home:


$306.8 billion (31 December 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 17
$256.8 billion (31 December 2009 est.)



Stock of direct foreign investment - abroad:


$260.5 billion (31 December 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 16
$224.5 billion (31 December 2009 est.)



Exchange rates:


Russian rubles (RUB) per US dollar - 30 (2010), 31.742 (2009),
24.853 (2008), 25.581 (2007), 27.191 (2006)







Communications ::Russia




Telephones - main lines in use:


44.802 million (2009)
country comparison to the world: 4


Telephones - mobile cellular:


230.5 million (2009)
country comparison to the world: 4


Telephone system:


general assessment: the telephone system is experiencing significant
changes; there are more than 1,000 companies licensed to offer
communication services; access to digital lines has improved,
particularly in urban centers; Internet and e-mail services are
improving; Russia has made progress toward building the
telecommunications infrastructure necessary for a market economy;
the estimated number of mobile subscribers jumped from fewer than 1
million in 1998 to some 230 million in 2009; a large demand for
fixed line service remains unsatisfied

domestic: cross-country digital trunk lines run from Saint
Petersburg to Khabarovsk, and from Moscow to Novorossiysk; the
telephone systems in 60 regional capitals have modern digital
infrastructures; cellular services, both analog and digital, are
available in many areas; in rural areas, the telephone services are
still outdated, inadequate, and low density

international: country code - 7; Russia is connected internationally
by undersea fiber optic cables; digital switches in several cities
provide more than 50,000 lines for international calls; satellite
earth stations provide access to Intelsat, Intersputnik, Eutelsat,
Inmarsat, and Orbita systems (2008)



Broadcast media:


6 national TV stations with the federal government owning 1 and
holding a controlling interest in a second; state-owned Gazprom
maintains a controlling interest in a third national channel;
government-affiliated Bank Rossiya owns controlling interest in a
fourth and fifth, while the sixth national channel is owned by the
Moscow city administration; roughly 3,300 national, regional, and
local TV stations operating with over two-thirds completely or
partially controlled by the federal or local governments; satellite
TV services are available; 2 state-run national radio networks with
a third majority-owned by Gazprom; roughly 2,400 public and
commercial radio stations (2007)



Internet country code:


.ru; note - Russia also has responsibility for a legacy domain ".su"
that was allocated to the Soviet Union and is being phased out



Internet hosts:


10.382 million (2010)
country comparison to the world: 12


Internet users:


40.853 million (2009)
country comparison to the world: 10






Transportation ::Russia




Airports:


1,213 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 5


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 593

over 3,047 m: 51

2,438 to 3,047 m: 201

1,524 to 2,437 m: 126

914 to 1,523 m: 98

under 914 m: 117 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 620

over 3,047 m: 3

2,438 to 3,047 m: 13

1,524 to 2,437 m: 68

914 to 1,523 m: 84

under 914 m: 452 (2010)



Heliports:


50 (2010)



Pipelines:


condensate 122 km; gas 159,552 km; liquid petroleum gas 127 km; oil
74,285 km; refined products 13,658 km (2009)



Railways:


total: 87,157 km
country comparison to the world: 2
broad gauge: 86,200 km 1.520-m gauge (40,300 km electrified)

narrow gauge: 957 km 1.067-m gauge (on Sakhalin Island)

note: an additional 30,000 km of non-common carrier lines serve
industries (2006)



Roadways:


total: 982,000 km
country comparison to the world: 8
paved: 776,000 km (includes 30,000 km of expressways)

unpaved: 206,000 km

note: includes public, local, and departmental roads (2009)



Waterways:


102,000 km (including 48,000 km with guaranteed depth)
country comparison to the world: 2
note: 72,000 km system in European Russia links Baltic Sea, White
Sea, Caspian Sea, Sea of Azov, and Black Sea (2009)



Merchant marine:


total: 1,097
country comparison to the world: 11
by type: bulk carrier 22, cargo 634, carrier 2, chemical tanker 38,
combination ore/oil 39, container 13, passenger 15, passenger/cargo
6, petroleum tanker 236, refrigerated cargo 77, roll on/roll off 11,
specialized tanker 4

foreign-owned: 145 (Belgium 4, Cyprus 11, Italy 9, South Korea 1,
Switzerland 4, Turkey 104, Ukraine 12)

registered in other countries: 443 (Antigua and Barbuda 3, Belize
32, Bulgaria 2, Cambodia 60, Comoros 21, Cook Islands 1, Cyprus 47,
Dominica 6, Georgia 7, Hong Kong 1, Liberia 108, Malaysia 2, Malta
47, Marshall Islands 6, Moldova 5, Mongolia 4, Panama 39, Saint
Kitts and Nevis 11, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 15, Sierra
Leone 6, Vanuatu 1, unknown 19) (2010)



Ports and terminals:


Kaliningrad, Kavkaz, Nakhodka, Novorossiysk, Primorsk, Saint
Petersburg, Vostochnyy







Military ::Russia




Military branches:


Ground Forces (Sukhoputnyye Voyskia, SV), Navy (Voyenno-Morskoy
Flot, VMF), Air Forces (Voyenno-Vozdushniye Sily, VVS); Airborne
Troops (VDV), Strategic Rocket Forces (Raketnyye Voyska
Strategicheskogo Naznacheniya, RVSN), and Space Troops
(Kosmicheskiye Voyska, KV) are independent "combat arms," not
subordinate to any of the three branches; Russian Ground Forces
include the following combat arms: motorized-rifle troops, tank
troops, missile and artillery troops, air defense of the ground
troops (2010)



Military service age and obligation:


18-27 years of age for compulsory or voluntary military service;
males are registered for the draft at 17 years of age; service
obligation - 1 year (conscripts can only be sent to combat zones
after 6 months training); reserve obligation to age 50

note: over 60% of draft-age Russian males receive some type of
deferment - generally health related - each draft cycle (2009)



Manpower available for military service:


males age 16-49: 34,850,217

females age 16-49: 35,693,977 (2010 est.)



Manpower fit for military service:


males age 16-49: 20,746,777

females age 16-49: 27,174,148 (2010 est.)



Manpower reaching militarily significant age annually:


male: 712,838

female: 678,623 (2010 est.)



Military expenditures:


3.9% of GDP (2005)
country comparison to the world: 26






Transnational Issues ::Russia




Disputes - international:


China and Russia have demarcated the once disputed islands at the
Amur and Ussuri confluence and in the Argun River in accordance with
the 2004 Agreement, ending their centuries-long border disputes; the
sovereignty dispute over the islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri,
Shikotan, and the Habomai group, known in Japan as the "Northern
Territories" and in Russia as the "Southern Kurils," occupied by the
Soviet Union in 1945, now administered by Russia, and claimed by
Japan, remains the primary sticking point to signing a peace treaty
formally ending World War II hostilities; Russia and Georgia agree
on delimiting all but small, strategic segments of the land boundary
and the maritime boundary; OSCE observers monitor volatile areas
such as the Pankisi Gorge in the Akhmeti region and the Kodori Gorge
in Abkhazia; Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Russia signed equidistance
boundaries in the Caspian seabed but the littoral states have no
consensus on dividing the water column; Russia and Norway reached an
agreement on how to align Barents Sea and Arctic Ocean boundaries
over EEZ and continental shelf in an agreement signed on 15
September 2010; this agreement is pending ratification by the
respective national assemblies; various groups in Finland advocate
restoration of Karelia (Kareliya) and other areas ceded to the
Soviet Union following the Second World War but the Finnish
Government asserts no territorial demands; in May 2005, Russia
recalled its signatures to the 1996 border agreements with Estonia
(1996) and Latvia (1997), when the two Baltic states announced
issuance of unilateral declarations referencing Soviet occupation
and ensuing territorial losses; Russia demands better treatment of
ethnic Russians in Estonia and Latvia; Estonian citizen groups
continue to press for realignment of the boundary based on the 1920
Tartu Peace Treaty that would bring the now divided ethnic Setu
people and parts of the Narva region within Estonia; Lithuania and
Russia committed to demarcating their boundary in 2006 in accordance
with the land and maritime treaty ratified by Russia in May 2003 and
by Lithuania in 1999; Lithuania operates a simplified transit regime
for Russian nationals traveling from the Kaliningrad coastal exclave
into Russia, while still conforming, as an EU member state with an
EU external border, where strict Schengen border rules apply;
preparations for the demarcation delimitation of land boundary with
Ukraine have commenced; the dispute over the boundary between Russia
and Ukraine through the Kerch Strait and Sea of Azov remains
unresolved despite a December 2003 framework agreement and on-going
expert-level discussions; Kazakhstan and Russia boundary
delimitation was ratified on November 2005 and field demarcation
should commence in 2007; Russian Duma has not yet ratified 1990
Bering Sea Maritime Boundary Agreement with the US



Refugees and internally displaced persons:


IDPs: 18,000-160,000 (displacement from Chechnya and North Ossetia)
(2007)



Trafficking in persons:


current situation: Russia is a source, transit, and destination
country for men, women, and children trafficked for various
purposes; it remains a significant source of women trafficked to
over 50 countries for commercial sexual exploitation; Russia is also
a transit and destination country for men and women trafficked from
Central Asia, Eastern Europe, and North Korea to Central and Western
Europe and the Middle East for purposes of forced labor and sexual
exploitation; internal trafficking remains a problem in Russia with
women trafficked from rural areas to urban centers for commercial
sexual exploitation, and men trafficked internally and from Central
Asia for forced labor in the construction and agricultural
industries; debt bondage is common among trafficking victims, and
child sex tourism remains a concern

tier rating: Tier 2 Watch List - Russia is on the Tier 2 Watch List
for a fifth consecutive year for its failure to show evidence of
increasing efforts to combat trafficking over the previous year,
particularly in providing assistance to victims of trafficking;
comprehensive trafficking victim assistance legislation, which would
address key deficiencies, has been pending before the Duma since
2003 and was neither passed nor enacted in 2007 (2008)



Illicit drugs:


limited cultivation of illicit cannabis and opium poppy and producer
of methamphetamine, mostly for domestic consumption; government has
active illicit crop eradication program; used as transshipment point
for Asian opiates, cannabis, and Latin American cocaine bound for
growing domestic markets, to a lesser extent Western and Central
Europe, and occasionally to the US; major source of heroin precursor
chemicals; corruption and organized crime are key concerns; major
consumer of opiates









page last updated on January 20, 2011

======================================================================





