Saint Barthelemy  (Central America and Caribbean)

Introduction ::Saint Barthelemy




Background:


Discovered in 1493 by Christopher COLUMBUS who named it for his
brother Bartolomeo, Saint Barthelemy was first settled by the French
in 1648. In 1784, the French sold the island to Sweden, who renamed
the largest town Gustavia, after the Swedish King GUSTAV III, and
made it a free port; the island prospered as a trade and supply
center during the colonial wars of the 18th century. France
repurchased the island in 1878 and placed it under the
administration of Guadeloupe. Saint Barthelemy retained its free
port status along with various Swedish appellations such as Swedish
street and town names, and the three-crown symbol on the coat of
arms. In 2003, the populace of the island voted to secede from
Guadeloupe and in 2007, the island became a French overseas
collectivity.







Geography ::Saint Barthelemy




Location:


located approximately 125 miles northwest of Guadeloupe



Geographic coordinates:


17 90 N, 62 85 W



Map references:


Central America and the Caribbean



Area:


21 sq km



Area - comparative:


less than an eighth of the size of Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Climate:


tropical, with practically no variation in temperature; has two
seasons (dry and humid)



Terrain:


hilly, almost completely surrounded by shallow-water reefs, with 20
beaches



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Caribbean Ocean 0 m

highest point: Morne du Vitet 286 m



Natural resources:


has few natural resources, its beaches being the most important



Environment - current issues:


with no natural rivers or streams, fresh water is in short supply,
especially in summer, and provided by desalinization of sea water,
collection of rain water, or imported via water tanker







People ::Saint Barthelemy




Population:


7,406 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 227


Age structure:


0-14 years: 19.2% (male 734/female 696)

15-64 years: 70.6% (male 2,855/female 2,402)

65 years and over: 10.2% (male 378/female 383) (2010 est.)



Median age:


total: 39.8 years

male: 39.9 years

female: 39.6 years (2010 est.)



Sex ratio:


at birth: 1.053 male(s)/female

under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female

15-64 years: 1.19 male(s)/female

65 years and over: 0.98 male(s)/female

total population: 1.14 male(s)/female (2010 est.)



Ethnic groups:


white, Creole (mulatto), black, Guadeloupe Mestizo (French-East Asia)



Religions:


Roman Catholic, Protestant, Jehovah's Witness



Languages:


French (primary), English







Government ::Saint Barthelemy




Country name:


conventional long form: Overseas Collectivity of Saint Barthelemy

conventional short form: Saint Barthelemy

local long form: Collectivite d'outre mer de Saint-Barthelemy

local short form: Saint-Barthelemy



Dependency status:


overseas collectivity of France



Capital:


name: Gustavia

geographic coordinates: 17 53 N, 62 51 W

time difference: UTC-4 (1 hour ahead of Washington, DC, during
Standard Time)



Independence:


none (overseas collectivity of France)



National holiday:


Bastille Day, 14 July (1789); note - local holiday is St. Barthelemy
Day, 24 August



Constitution:


4 October 1958 (French Constitution)



Legal system:


the laws of France, where applicable, apply



Suffrage:


18 years of age, universal



Executive branch:


chief of state: President Nicolas SARKOZY (since 16 May 2007),
represented by Prefect Dominique LACROIX (since 21 March 2007)

head of government: President of the Territorial Council Bruno
MAGRAS (since 16 July 2007)

cabinet: Executive Council; note - there is also an advisory,
economic, social, and cultural council
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: French president elected by popular vote for a five-year
term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
French Ministry of Interior; president of the Territorial Council
elected by the members of the Council for a five-year term

election results: Bruno MAGRAS unanimously elected president by the
Territorial Council on 16 July 2007



Legislative branch:


unicameral Territorial Council (19 seats; members elected by popular
vote to serve five-year terms)

elections: last held on 1 and 8 July 2007 (next to be held in July
2012)

election results: percent of vote by party - SBA 72.2%,
Action-Equilibre-Transparence 9.9%, Ensemble pour Saint-Barthelemy
7.9%, Tous Unis pour Saint-Barthelemy 9.9%; seats by party - SBA 16,
Action-Equilibre-Transparence 1, Ensemble pour Saint-Barthelemy 1,
Tous Unis pour Saint-Barthelemy 1

note: Saint Barthelemy elects one seat to the French Senate;
election last held on 21 September 2008 (next to be held in
September 2014); results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats by
party - UMP 1



Political parties and leaders:


Action-Equilibre-Transparence [Maxime DESOUCHES]; Ensemble pour
Saint-Barthelemy [Benoit CHAUVIN]; Saint-Barth d'Abord! or SBA
[Bruno MAGRAS]; Tous Unis pour Saint-Barthelemy [Karine MIOT-RICHARD]



Political pressure groups and leaders:


The Marine Reserve (protection of fish); Rotary Club



International organization participation:


UPU



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas collectivity of France)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas collectivity of France)



Flag description:


the flag of France is used



National anthem:


name: "L'Hymne a St. Barthelemy" (Hymn to St. Barthelemy)

lyrics/music: Isabelle Massart DERAVIN/Michael VALENTI

note: local anthem in use since 1999; as a collectivity of France,
"La Marseillaise" is official (see France)







Economy ::Saint Barthelemy




Economy - overview:


The economy of Saint Barthelemy is based upon high-end tourism and
duty-free luxury commerce, serving visitors primarily from North
America. The luxury hotels and villas host 70,000 visitors each year
with another 130,000 arriving by boat. The relative isolation and
high cost of living inhibits mass tourism. The construction and
public sectors also enjoy significant investment in support of
tourism. With limited fresh water resources, all food must be
imported, as must all energy resources and most manufactured goods.
Employment is strong and attracts labor from Brazil and Portugal.



Exchange rates:


euros (EUR) per US dollar - 0.7715 (2010), 0.7338 (2009), 0.6827
(2008), 0.7345 (2007), 0.7964 (2006)







Communications ::Saint Barthelemy




Telephone system:


general assessment: fully integrated access

domestic: direct dial capability with both fixed and wireless systems

international: country code - 590; undersea fiber-optic cable
provides voice and data connectivity to Puerto Rico and Guadeloupe



Broadcast media:


no local TV broadcasters; 3 FM radio channels (2 via repeater)



Internet country code:


.bl; note - .gp, the internet country code for Guadeloupe, and .fr,
the internet country code for France, might also be encountered







Transportation ::Saint Barthelemy




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 226


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

under 914 m: 1 (2010)



Ports and terminals:


Gustavia



Transportation - note:


nearest airport for international flights is Princess Juliana
International Airport (SXM) located in Sint Maarten







Military ::Saint Barthelemy




Manpower fit for military service:


males age 16-49: 1,543

females age 16-49: 1,303 (2010 est.)



Manpower reaching militarily significant age annually:


male: 21

female: 21 (2010 est.)



Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of France










page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





