South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands  (South America)

Introduction ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Background:


The islands, which have large bird and seal populations, lie
approximately 1,000 km east of the Falkland Islands and have been
under British administration since 1908 - except for a brief period
in 1982 when Argentina occupied them. Grytviken, on South Georgia,
was a 19th and early 20th century whaling station. Famed explorer
Ernest SHACKLETON stopped there in 1914 en route to his ill-fated
attempt to cross Antarctica on foot. He returned some 20 months
later with a few companions in a small boat and arranged a
successful rescue for the rest of his crew, stranded off the
Antarctic Peninsula. He died in 1922 on a subsequent expedition and
is buried in Grytviken. Today, the station houses scientists from
the British Antarctic Survey. Recognizing the importance of
preserving the marine stocks in adjacent waters, the UK, in 1993,
extended the exclusive fishing zone from 12 nm to 200 nm around each
island.







Geography ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Location:


Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic Ocean, east of
the tip of South America



Geographic coordinates:


54 30 S, 37 00 W



Map references:


South America



Area:


total: 3,903 sq km
country comparison to the world: 176
land: 3,903 sq km

water: 0 sq km

note: includes Shag Rocks, Black Rock, Clerke Rocks, South Georgia
Island, Bird Island, and the South Sandwich Islands, which consist
of 11 islands



Area - comparative:


slightly larger than Rhode Island



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


NA



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm



Climate:


variable, with mostly westerly winds throughout the year
interspersed with periods of calm; nearly all precipitation falls as
snow



Terrain:


most of the islands, rising steeply from the sea, are rugged and
mountainous; South Georgia is largely barren and has steep,
glacier-covered mountains; the South Sandwich Islands are of
volcanic origin with some active volcanoes



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point: Mount Paget (South Georgia) 2,934 m



Natural resources:


fish



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (largely covered by permanent ice and snow with some
sparse vegetation consisting of grass, moss, and lichen) (2005)



Irrigated land:


0 sq km



Natural hazards:


the South Sandwich Islands have prevailing weather conditions that
generally make them difficult to approach by ship; they are also
subject to active volcanism



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


the north coast of South Georgia has several large bays, which
provide good anchorage; reindeer, introduced early in the 20th
century, live on South Georgia







People ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

note: the small military garrison on South Georgia withdrew in March
2001 replaced by a permanent group of scientists of the British
Antarctic Survey, which also has a biological station on Bird
Island; the South Sandwich Islands are uninhabited







Government ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Country name:


conventional long form: South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

conventional short form: South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands

abbreviation: SGSSI



Dependency status:


overseas territory of the UK, also claimed by Argentina;
administered from the Falkland Islands by a commissioner, who is
concurrently governor of the Falkland Islands, representing Queen
ELIZABETH II



Legal system:


the laws of the UK where applicable apply; the senior magistrate
from the Falkland Islands presides over the Magistrates Court



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK, also claimed by Argentina)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (overseas territory of the UK, also claimed by Argentina)



Flag description:


blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and
the South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands coat of arms centered
on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms features a shield
with a golden lion rampant, holding a torch; the shield is supported
by a fur seal on the left and a Macaroni penguin on the right; a
reindeer appears above the crest, and below the shield on a scroll
is the motto LEO TERRAM PROPRIAM PROTEGAT (Let the Lion Protect its
Own Land)); the lion with the torch represents the UK and discovery;
the background of the shield, blue and white estoiles, are found in
the coat of arms of James Cook, discoverer of the islands; all the
outer supporting animals represented are native to the islands







Economy ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Economy - overview:


Some fishing takes place in adjacent waters. There is a potential
source of income from harvesting finfish and krill. The islands
receive income from postage stamps produced in the UK, sale of
fishing licenses, and harbor and landing fees from tourist vessels.
Tourism from specialized cruise ships is increasing rapidly.







Communications ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Telephone system:


general assessment: NA

domestic: NA

international: coastal radiotelephone station at Grytviken



Internet country code:


.gs



Internet hosts:


320 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 183






Transportation ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Ports and terminals:


Grytviken







Military ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the UK







Transnational Issues ::South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands




Disputes - international:


Argentina, which claims the islands in its constitution and briefly
occupied them by force in 1982, agreed in 1995 to no longer seek
settlement by force









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





