Spratly Islands  (East & Southeast Asia)

Introduction ::Spratly Islands




Background:


The Spratly Islands consist of more than 100 small islands or reefs.
They are surrounded by rich fishing grounds and potentially by gas
and oil deposits. They are claimed in their entirety by China,
Taiwan, and Vietnam, while portions are claimed by Malaysia and the
Philippines. About 45 islands are occupied by relatively small
numbers of military forces from China, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Taiwan, and Vietnam. Brunei has established a fishing zone that
overlaps a southern reef but has not made any formal claim.







Geography ::Spratly Islands




Location:


Southeastern Asia, group of reefs and islands in the South China
Sea, about two-thirds of the way from southern Vietnam to the
southern Philippines



Geographic coordinates:


8 38 N, 111 55 E



Map references:


Southeast Asia



Area:


total: less than 5 sq km
country comparison to the world: 247
land: less than 5 sq km

water: 0 sq km

note: includes 100 or so islets, coral reefs, and sea mounts
scattered over an area of nearly 410,000 sq km of the central South
China Sea



Area - comparative:


NA



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


926 km



Maritime claims:


NA



Climate:


tropical



Terrain:


flat



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: South China Sea 0 m

highest point: unnamed location on Southwest Cay 4 m



Natural resources:


fish, guano, undetermined oil and natural gas potential



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Irrigated land:


0 sq km



Natural hazards:


typhoons; numerous reefs and shoals pose a serious maritime hazard



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


strategically located near several primary shipping lanes in the
central South China Sea; includes numerous small islands, atolls,
shoals, and coral reefs







People ::Spratly Islands




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

note: there are scattered garrisons occupied by personnel of several
claimant states







Government ::Spratly Islands




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Spratly Islands







Economy ::Spratly Islands




Economy - overview:


Economic activity is limited to commercial fishing. The proximity to
nearby oil- and gas-producing sedimentary basins suggests the
potential for oil and gas deposits, but the region is largely
unexplored. There are no reliable estimates of potential reserves.
Commercial exploitation has yet to be developed.








Transportation ::Spratly Islands




Airports:


4 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 185


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 3

914 to 1,523 m: 2

under 914 m: 1 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 1

914 to 1,523 m: 1 (2010)



Heliports:


3 (2010)



Ports and terminals:


none; offshore anchorage only







Military ::Spratly Islands




Military - note:


Spratly Islands consist of more than 100 small islands or reefs of
which about 45 are claimed and occupied by China, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam







Transnational Issues ::Spratly Islands




Disputes - international:


all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by China (including Taiwan)
and Vietnam; parts of them are claimed by Brunei, Malaysia and the
Philippines; despite no public territorial claim to Louisa Reef,
Brunei implicitly lays claim by including it within the natural
prolongation of its continental shelf and basis for a seabed median
with Vietnam; claimants in November 2002 signed the "Declaration on
the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea," which has eased
tensions but falls short of a legally binding "code of conduct"; in
March 2005, the national oil companies of China, the Philippines,
and Vietnam signed a joint accord to conduct marine seismic
activities in the Spratly Islands









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





