Svalbard  (Europe)

Introduction ::Svalbard




Background:


First discovered by the Norwegians in the 12th century, the islands
served as an international whaling base during the 17th and 18th
centuries. Norway's sovereignty was recognized in 1920; five years
later it officially took over the territory.







Geography ::Svalbard




Location:


Northern Europe, islands between the Arctic Ocean, Barents Sea,
Greenland Sea, and Norwegian Sea, north of Norway



Geographic coordinates:


78 00 N, 20 00 E



Map references:


Europe



Area:


total: 62,045 sq km
country comparison to the world: 124
land: 62,045 sq km

water: 0 sq km

note: includes Spitsbergen and Bjornoya (Bear Island)



Area - comparative:


slightly smaller than West Virginia



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


3,587 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 4 nm

exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm unilaterally claimed by Norway but
not recognized by Russia



Climate:


arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool summers, cold
winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and north coasts of
Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most of the year



Terrain:


wild, rugged mountains; much of high land ice covered; west coast
clear of ice about one-half of the year; fjords along west and north
coasts



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Arctic Ocean 0 m

highest point: Newtontoppen 1,717 m



Natural resources:


coal, iron ore, copper, zinc, phosphate, wildlife, fish



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (no trees; the only bushes are crowberry and cloudberry)
(2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


ice floes often block the entrance to Bellsund (a transit point for
coal export) on the west coast and occasionally make parts of the
northeastern coast inaccessible to maritime traffic



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


northernmost part of the Kingdom of Norway; consists of nine main
islands; glaciers and snowfields cover 60% of the total area;
Spitsbergen Island is the site of the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, a
seed repository established by the Global Crop Diversity Trust and
the Norwegian Government







People ::Svalbard




Population:


2,067 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 232


Age structure:


0-14 years: NA

15-64 years: NA

65 years and over: NA (2009 est.)



Population growth rate:


-0.023% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 200


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Sex ratio:


NA



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


0% (2001)
country comparison to the world: 170


HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


0 (2001)
country comparison to the world: 165


HIV/AIDS - deaths:


0 (2001)
country comparison to the world: 156


Ethnic groups:


Norwegian 55.4%, Russian and Ukrainian 44.3%, other 0.3% (1998)



Languages:


Norwegian, Russian



Literacy:


NA







Government ::Svalbard




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Svalbard (sometimes referred to as
Spitzbergen)



Dependency status:


territory of Norway; administered by the Polar Department of the
Ministry of Justice, through a governor (sysselmann) residing in
Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen; by treaty (9 February 1920) sovereignty
was awarded to Norway



Government type:


NA



Capital:


name: Longyearbyen

geographic coordinates: 78 13 N, 15 33 E

time difference: UTC+1 (6 hours ahead of Washington, DC during
Standard Time)

daylight saving time: +1hr, begins last Sunday in March; ends last
Sunday in October



Independence:


none (territory of Norway)



Legal system:


the laws of Norway where applicable apply



Executive branch:


chief of state: King HARALD V of Norway (since 17 January 1991)

head of government: Governor Odd Olsen INGERO (since September
2009); Assistant Governor Lars FAUSE (since September 2008)

elections: none; the monarchy is hereditary; governor and assistant
governor responsible to the Polar Department of the Ministry of
Justice



Political pressure groups and leaders:


NA



International organization participation:


none



Flag description:


the flag of Norway is used



National anthem:


note: as a territory of Norway, "Ja, vi elsker dette landet" is
official (see Norway)







Economy ::Svalbard




Economy - overview:


Coal mining, tourism, and international research are the major
revenue sources on Svalbard. Coal mining is the dominant economic
activity and a treaty of 9 February 1920 gave the 41 signatories
equal rights to exploit mineral deposits, subject to Norwegian
regulation. Although US, UK, Dutch, and Swedish coal companies have
mined in the past, the only companies still engaging in this are
Norwegian and Russian. The settlements on Svalbard are essentially
company towns. The Norwegian state-owned coal company employs nearly
60% of the Norwegian population on the island, runs many of the
local services, and provides most of the local infrastructure. There
is also some hunting of seal, reindeer, and fox.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$NA



GDP - real growth rate:


NA%



Labor force:


1,234 in Norwegian settlements (2003)
country comparison to the world: 225


Exports:


$197.6 million (2000)



Imports:


$NA



Exchange rates:


Norwegian kroner (NOK) per US dollar - 6.1533 (2009), 5.6361 (2008),
5.86 (2007), 6.418 (2006)







Communications ::Svalbard




Telephones - main lines in use:


NA



Telephone system:


general assessment: probably adequate

domestic: local telephone service

international: country code - 47-790; satellite earth station - 1 of
unknown type (for communication with Norwegian mainland only)



Broadcast media:


the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) began direct television
transmission to Svalbard via satellite in 1984; Longyearbyen
households have access to 3 NRK radio and 2 television stations
(2008)



Internet country code:


.sj







Transportation ::Svalbard




Airports:


4 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 186


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (2010)



Airports - with unpaved runways:


total: 3

under 914 m: 3 (2010)



Heliports:


1 (2010)



Ports and terminals:


Barentsburg, Longyearbyen, Ny-Alesund, Pyramiden







Military ::Svalbard




Military branches:


no regular military forces



Military - note:


Svalbard is a territory of Norway, demilitarized by treaty on 9
February 1920; Norwegian military activity is limited to fisheries
surveillance by the Norwegian Coast Guard







Transnational Issues ::Svalbard




Disputes - international:


despite recent discussions, Russia and Norway dispute their maritime
limits in the Barents Sea and Russia's fishing rights beyond
Svalbard's territorial limits within the Svalbard Treaty zone









page last updated on January 11, 2011

======================================================================





