Tokelau  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Tokelau




Background:


Originally settled by Polynesian emigrants from surrounding island
groups, the Tokelau Islands were made a British protectorate in
1889. They were transferred to New Zealand administration in 1925.
Referenda held in 2006 and 2007 to change the status of the islands
from that of a New Zealand territory to one of free association with
New Zealand did not meet the needed threshold for approval.







Geography ::Tokelau




Location:


Oceania, group of three atolls in the South Pacific Ocean, about
one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand



Geographic coordinates:


9 00 S, 172 00 W



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 12 sq km
country comparison to the world: 241
land: 12 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


about 17 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


101 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical; moderated by trade winds (April to November)



Terrain:


low-lying coral atolls enclosing large lagoons



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point: unnamed location 5 m



Natural resources:


NEGL



Land use:


arable land: 0% (soil is thin and infertile)

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Irrigated land:


NA



Natural hazards:


lies in Pacific typhoon belt



Environment - current issues:


limited natural resources and overcrowding are contributing to
emigration to New Zealand



Geography - note:


consists of three atolls (Atafu, Fakaofo, Nukunonu), each with a
lagoon surrounded by a number of reef-bound islets of varying length
and rising to over 3 m above sea level







People ::Tokelau




Population:


1,400 (July 2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 234


Age structure:


0-14 years: 42%

15-64 years: 53%

65 years and over: 5% (2009 est.)



Population growth rate:


-0.011% (2010 est.)
country comparison to the world: 199


Birth rate:


NA



Death rate:


NA



Net migration rate:


NA



Urbanization:


urban population: 0% of total population (2008)

rate of urbanization: 0% annual rate of change (2005-10 est.)



Sex ratio:


NA



Infant mortality rate:


total: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: NA

male: NA

female: NA



Total fertility rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


NA



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


NA



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


NA



Nationality:


noun: Tokelauan(s)

adjective: Tokelauan



Ethnic groups:


Polynesian



Religions:


Congregational Christian Church 70%, Roman Catholic 28%, other 2%

note: on Atafu, all Congregational Christian Church of Samoa; on
Nukunonu, all Roman Catholic; on Fakaofo, both denominations, with
the Congregational Christian Church predominant



Languages:


Tokelauan (a Polynesian language), English



Literacy:


NA



School life expectancy (primary to tertiary education):


total: 11 years

male: 10 years

female: 11 years (2004)



Education expenditures:


NA







Government ::Tokelau




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Tokelau



Dependency status:


self-administering territory of New Zealand; note - Tokelau and New
Zealand have agreed to a draft constitution as Tokelau moves toward
free association with New Zealand; a UN-sponsored referendum on self
governance in October 2007 did not produce the two-thirds majority
vote necessary for changing the political status



Government type:


NA



Capital:


none; each atoll has its own administrative center

time difference: UTC-11 (6 hours behind Washington, DC during
Standard Time)



Administrative divisions:


none (territory of New Zealand)



Independence:


none (territory of New Zealand)



National holiday:


Waitangi Day (Treaty of Waitangi established British sovereignty
over New Zealand), 6 February (1840)



Constitution:


administered under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948; amended in 1970



Legal system:


New Zealand and local statutes



Suffrage:


21 years of age; universal



Executive branch:


chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952);
represented by Governor General of New Zealand Anand SATYANAND
(since 23 August 2006); New Zealand is represented by Administrator
David PAYTON (since 17 October 2006)

head of government: Foua TOLOA (since 21 February 2009); note -
position rotates annually among the 3 Faipule (village leaders)

cabinet: the Council for the Ongoing Government of Tokelau,
consisting of 3 Faipule (village leaders) and 3 Pulenuku (village
mayors), functions as a cabinet
(For more information visit the World Leaders website )
elections: the monarchy is hereditary; administrator appointed by
the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade in New Zealand; the head
of government chosen from the Council of Faipule and serves a
one-year term



Legislative branch:


unicameral General Fono (20 seats; members elected by popular vote
to serve three-year terms based upon proportional representation
from the three islands; Atafu has 7 seats, Fakaofo has 7 seats,
Nukunonu has 6 seats); note - the Tokelau Amendment Act of 1996
confers limited legislative power to the General Fono

elections: last held on 17-19 January 2008 (next to be held in 2011)

election results: independents 20



Judicial branch:


Supreme Court in New Zealand exercises civil and criminal
jurisdiction in Tokelau



Political parties and leaders:


none



Political pressure groups and leaders:


none



International organization participation:


PIF (observer), SPC, UNESCO (associate), UPU



Diplomatic representation in the US:


none (territory of New Zealand)



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (territory of New Zealand)



Flag description:


a yellow stylized Tokelauan canoe on a dark blue field sails toward
the manu - the Southern Cross constellation of four, white,
five-pointed stars at the hoist side; the Southern Cross represents
the role of Christianity in Tokelauan culture and symbolizes the
country's navigating into the future, the color yellow indicates
happiness and peace, and the blue field represents the ocean on
which the community relies



National anthem:


name: "Te Atua" (For the Almighty)

lyrics/music: unknown/Falani KALOLO

note: adopted 2008; in preparation for eventual self governance,
Tokelau held a national contest to choose an anthem; as a territory
of New Zealand, "God Defend New Zealand" and "God Save the Queen"
are official (see New Zealand)







Economy ::Tokelau




Economy - overview:


Tokelau's small size (three villages), isolation, and lack of
resources greatly restrain economic development and confine
agriculture to the subsistence level. The people rely heavily on aid
from New Zealand - about $10 million annually in 2008 and 2009 - to
maintain public services. New Zealand's support amounts to 80% of
Tokelau's recurrent government budget. An international trust fund,
currently worth nearly US$32 million, was established in 2004 to
provide Tokelau an independent source of revenue. The principal
sources of revenue come from sales of copra, postage stamps,
souvenir coins, and handicrafts. Money is also remitted to families
from relatives in New Zealand.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$1.5 million (1993 est.)
country comparison to the world: 228


GDP (official exchange rate):


$NA



GDP - real growth rate:


NA%



GDP - per capita (PPP):


$1,000 (1993 est.)
country comparison to the world: 215


GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: NA%

industry: NA%

services: NA%



Labor force:


440 (2001)
country comparison to the world: 228


Unemployment rate:


NA%



Population below poverty line:


NA%



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


NA%



Agriculture - products:


coconuts, copra, breadfruit, papayas, bananas; pigs, poultry, goats;
fish



Industries:


small-scale enterprises for copra production, woodworking, plaited
craft goods; stamps, coins; fishing



Electricity - production:


NA kWh



Electricity - consumption:


NA kWh



Exports:


$0 (2002)
country comparison to the world: 223


Exports - commodities:


stamps, copra, handicrafts



Imports:


$969,200 (2002)
country comparison to the world: 222


Imports - commodities:


foodstuffs, building materials, fuel



Exchange rates:


New Zealand dollars (NZD) per US dollar - 1.4015 (2010), 1.6002
(2009), 1.4151 (2008), 1.3811 (2007), 1.5408 (2006)







Communications ::Tokelau




Telephones - main lines in use:


300 (2009)
country comparison to the world: 228


Telephone system:


general assessment: modern satellite-based communications system

domestic: radiotelephone service between islands

international: country code - 690; radiotelephone service to Samoa;
government-regulated telephone service (TeleTok); satellite earth
stations - 3



Broadcast media:


no broadcast television stations; each atoll operates a radio
service that provides shipping news and weather reports (2009)



Internet country code:


.tk



Internet hosts:


526 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 178


Internet users:


800 (2008)
country comparison to the world: 215






Transportation ::Tokelau




Ports and terminals:


none; offshore anchorage only







Military ::Tokelau




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of New Zealand







Transnational Issues ::Tokelau




Disputes - international:


Tokelau included American Samoa's Swains Island (Olohega) in its
2006 draft constitution









page last updated on January 12, 2011

======================================================================





