United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Background:


All of the following US Pacific island territories except Midway
Atoll constitute the Pacific Remote Islands National Wildlife Refuge
(NWR) Complex and as such are managed by the Fish and Wildlife
Service of the US Department of the Interior. Midway Atoll NWR has
been included in a Refuge Complex with the Hawaiian Islands NWR and
also designated as part of Papahanaumokuakea Marine National
Monument. These remote refuges are the most widespread collection of
marine- and terrestrial-life protected areas on the planet under a
single country's jurisdiction. They sustain many endemic species
including corals, fish, shellfish, marine mammals, seabirds, water
birds, land birds, insects, and vegetation not found elsewhere.

Baker Island: The US took possession of the island in 1857. Its
guano deposits were mined by US and British companies during the
second half of the 19th century. In 1935, a short-lived attempt at
colonization began on this island but was disrupted by World War II
and thereafter abandoned. The island was established as a NWR in
1974.

Howland Island: Discovered by the US early in the 19th century, the
uninhabited atoll was officially claimed by the US in 1857. Both US
and British companies mined for guano deposits until about 1890. In
1935, a short-lived attempt at colonization began on this island,
similar to the effort on nearby Baker Island, but was disrupted by
World War II and thereafter abandoned. The famed American aviatrix
Amelia EARHART disappeared while seeking out Howland Island as a
refueling stop during her 1937 round-the-world flight; Earhart
Light, a day beacon near the middle of the west coast, was named in
her memory. The island was established as a NWR in 1974.

Jarvis Island: First discovered by the British in 1821, the
uninhabited island was annexed by the US in 1858 but abandoned in
1879 after tons of guano had been removed. The UK annexed the island
in 1889 but never carried out plans for further exploitation. The US
occupied and reclaimed the island in 1935. It was abandoned in 1942
during World War II. The island was established as a NWR in 1974.

Johnston Atoll: Both the US and the Kingdom of Hawaii annexed
Johnston Atoll in 1858, but it was the US that mined the guano
deposits until the late 1880s. Johnston and Sand Islands were
designated wildlife refuges in 1926. The US Navy took over the atoll
in 1934. Subsequently, the US Air Force assumed control in 1948. The
site was used for high-altitude nuclear tests in the 1950s and
1960s. Until late in 2000 the atoll was maintained as a storage and
disposal site for chemical weapons. Munitions destruction, cleanup,
and closure of the facility were completed by May 2005. The Fish and
Wildlife Service and the US Air Force are currently discussing
future management options; in the interim, Johnston Atoll and the
three-mile Naval Defensive Sea around it remain under the
jurisdiction and administrative control of the US Air Force.

Kingman Reef: The US annexed the reef in 1922. Its sheltered lagoon
served as a way station for flying boats on Hawaii-to-American Samoa
flights during the late 1930s. There are no terrestrial plants on
the reef, which is frequently awash, but it does support abundant
and diverse marine fauna and flora. In 2001, the waters surrounding
the reef out to 12 nm were designated a US NWR.

Midway Islands: The US took formal possession of the islands in
1867. The laying of the trans-Pacific cable, which passed through
the islands, brought the first residents in 1903. Between 1935 and
1947, Midway was used as a refueling stop for trans-Pacific flights.
The US naval victory over a Japanese fleet off Midway in 1942 was
one of the turning points of World War II. The islands continued to
serve as a naval station until closed in 1993. Today the islands are
a NWR and are the site of the world's largest Laysan albatross
colony.

Palmyra Atoll: The Kingdom of Hawaii claimed the atoll in 1862, and
the US included it among the Hawaiian Islands when it annexed the
archipelago in 1898. The Hawaii Statehood Act of 1959 did not
include Palmyra Atoll, which is now partly privately owned by the
Nature Conservancy with the rest owned by the Federal government and
managed by the US Fish and Wildlife Service. These organizations are
managing the atoll as a wildlife refuge. The lagoons and surrounding
waters within the 12 nm US territorial seas were transferred to the
US Fish and Wildlife Service and designated as a NWR in January 2001.







Geography ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Location:


Oceania

Baker Island: atoll in the North Pacific Ocean 1,830 nm (3,389 km)
southwest of Honolulu, about half way between Hawaii and Australia

Howland Island: island in the North Pacific Ocean 1,815 nm (3,361
km) southwest of Honolulu, about half way between Hawaii and
Australia

Jarvis Island: island in the South Pacific Ocean 1,305 nm (2,417 km)
south of Honolulu, about half way between Hawaii and Cook Islands

Johnston Atoll: atoll in the North Pacific Ocean 717 nm (1,328 km)
southwest of Honolulu, about one-third of the way from Hawaii to the
Marshall Islands

Kingman Reef: reef in the North Pacific Ocean 930 nm (1,722 km)
south of Honolulu, about half way between Hawaii and American Samoa

Midway Islands: atoll in the North Pacific Ocean 1,260 nm (2,334 km)
northwest of Honolulu near the end of the Hawaiian Archipelago,
about one-third of the way from Honolulu to Tokyo

Palmyra Atoll: atoll in the North Pacific Ocean 960 nm (1,778 km)
south of Honolulu, about half way between Hawaii and American Samoa



Geographic coordinates:


Baker Island: 0 13 N, 176 28 W

Howland Island: 0 48 N, 176 38 W

Jarvis Island: 0 23 S, 160 01 W

Johnston Atoll: 16 45 N, 169 31 W

Kingman Reef: 6 23 N, 162 25 W

Midway Islands: 28 12 N, 177 22 W

Palmyra Atoll: 5 53 N, 162 05 W



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total - 6,959.41 sq km; emergent land - 22.41 sq km; submerged -
6,937 sq km
country comparison to the world: 238
Baker Island: total - 129.1 sq km; emergent land - 2.1 sq km;
submerged - 127 sq km

Howland Island: total - 138.6 sq km; emergent land - 2.6 sq km;
submerged - 136 sq km

Jarvis Island: total - 152 sq km; emergent land - 5 sq km; submerged
- 147 sq km

Johnston Atoll: total - 276.6 sq km; emergent land - 2.6 sq km;
submerged - 274 sq km

Kingman Reef: total - 1,958.01 sq km; emergent land - 0.01 sq km;
submerged - 1,958 sq km

Midway Islands: total - 2,355.2 sq km; emergent land - 6.2 sq km;
submerged - 2,349 sq km

Palmyra Atoll: total - 1,949.9 sq km; emergent land - 3.9 sq km;
submerged - 1,946 sq km



Area - comparative:


Baker Island: about two and a half times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Howland Island: about three times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Jarvis Island: about eight times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Johnston Atoll: about four and a half times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Kingman Reef: a little more than one and a half times the size of
The Mall in Washington, DC

Midway Islands: about nine times the size of The Mall in Washington,
DC

Palmyra Atoll: about 20 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


none



Coastline:


Baker Island: 4.8 km

Howland Island: 6.4 km

Jarvis Island: 8 km

Johnston Atoll: 34 km

Kingman Reef: 3 km

Midway Islands: 15 km

Palmyra Atoll: 14.5 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands: equatorial; scant rainfall,
constant wind, burning sun

Johnston Atoll and Kingman Reef: tropical, but generally dry;
consistent northeast trade winds with little seasonal temperature
variation

Midway Islands: subtropical with cool, moist winters (December to
February) and warm, dry summers (May to October); moderated by
prevailing easterly winds; most of the 1,067 mm (42 in) of annual
rainfall occurs during the winter

Palmyra Atoll: equatorial, hot; located within the low pressure area
of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) where the northeast and
southeast trade winds meet, it is extremely wet with between
4,000-5,000 mm (160-200 in) of rainfall each year



Terrain:


low and nearly level sandy coral islands with narrow fringing reefs
that have developed at the top of submerged volcanic mountains,
which in most cases rise steeply from the ocean floor



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point: Baker Island, unnamed location - 8 m; Howland Island,
unnamed location - 3 m; Jarvis Island, unnamed location - 7 m;
Johnston Atoll, Sand Island - 10 m; Kingman Reef, unnamed location -
less than 2 m; Midway Islands, unnamed location - 13 m; Palmyra
Atoll, unnamed location - 3 m



Natural resources:


terrestrial and aquatic wildlife



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2008)



Natural hazards:


Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands: the narrow fringing reef
surrounding the island can be a maritime hazard

Kingman Reef: wet or awash most of the time, maximum elevation of
less than 2 m makes Kingman Reef a maritime hazard

Midway Islands, Johnston, and Palmyra Atolls: NA



Environment - current issues:


Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands, and Johnston Atoll: no natural
fresh water resources

Kingman Reef: none

Midway Islands and Palmyra Atoll: NA



Geography - note:


Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands: scattered vegetation consisting
of grasses, prostrate vines, and low growing shrubs; primarily a
nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds,
and marine wildlife; closed to the public

Johnston Atoll: Johnston Island and Sand Island are natural islands,
which have been expanded by coral dredging; North Island (Akau) and
East Island (Hikina) are manmade islands formed from coral dredging;
the egg-shaped reef is 34 km in circumference; closed to the public

Kingman Reef: barren coral atoll with deep interior lagoon; closed
to the public

Midway Islands: a coral atoll managed as a NWR and open to the
public for wildlife-related recreation in the form of wildlife
observation and photography

Palmyra Atoll: the high rainfall and resulting lush vegetation make
the environment of this atoll unique among the US Pacific Island
territories; supports a large undisturbed stand of Pisonia beach
forest







People ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

note: public entry is by special-use permit from US Fish and
Wildlife Service only and generally restricted to scientists and
educators; visited annually by US Fish and Wildlife Service

Johnston Atoll: in previous years, an average of 1,100 US military
and civilian contractor personnel were present; as of May 2005, all
US government personnel had left the island

Midway Islands: approximately 40 people make up the staff of US Fish
and Wildlife Service and their services contractor living at the
atoll

Palmyra Atoll: four to 20 Nature Conservancy, US Fish and Wildlife
staff, and researchers







Government ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Baker Island; Howland Island; Jarvis
Island; Johnston Atoll; Kingman Reef; Midway Islands; Palmyra Atoll



Dependency status:


unincorporated territories of the US; administered from Washington,
DC by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the
Interior as part of the National Wildlife Refuge system

note on Palmyra Atoll: incorporated Territory of the US; partly
privately owned and partly federally owned; administered from
Washington, DC by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department
of the Interior; the Office of Insular Affairs of the US Department
of the Interior continues to administer nine excluded areas
comprising certain tidal and submerged lands within the 12 nm
territorial sea or within the lagoon



Legal system:


the laws of the US where applicable apply



Diplomatic representation from the US:


none (territories of the US)



Flag description:


the flag of the US is used







Economy ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Economy - overview:


no economic activity








Transportation ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Airports:


Baker Island: one abandoned World War II runway of 1,665 m covered
with vegetation and unusable

Howland Island: airstrip constructed in 1937 for scheduled refueling
stop on the round-the-world flight of Amelia EARHART and Fred
NOONAN; the aviators left Lae, New Guinea, for Howland Island but
were never seen again; the airstrip is no longer serviceable

Johnston Atoll: one closed and not maintained

Kingman Reef: lagoon was used as a halfway station between Hawaii
and American Samoa by Pan American Airways for flying boats in 1937
and 1938

Midway Islands: 3 - one operational (2,409 m paved); no fuel for
sale except emergencies

Palmyra Atoll: 1 - 1,846 m unpaved runway; privately owned (2010)



Ports and terminals:


Baker, Howland, and Jarvis Islands, and Kingman Reef: none; offshore
anchorage only

Johnston Atoll: Johnston Island

Midway Islands: Sand Island

Palmyra Atoll: West Lagoon







Military ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the US







Transnational Issues ::United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges




Disputes - international:


none









page last updated on November 17, 2010

======================================================================





