Wake Island  (Australia-Oceania)

Introduction ::Wake Island




Background:


The US annexed Wake Island in 1899 for a cable station. An important
air and naval base was constructed in 1940-41. In December 1941, the
island was captured by the Japanese and held until the end of World
War II. In subsequent years, Wake was developed as a stopover and
refueling site for military and commercial aircraft transiting the
Pacific. Since 1974, the island's airstrip has been used by the US
military, as well as for emergency landings. Although operations on
the island were suspended and all personnel evacuated in August 2006
with the approach of super typhoon IOKE (category 5), damage was
comparatively minor. A US Air Force repair team restored full
capability to the airfield and facilities, which remains a vital
strategic link in the Pacific region.







Geography ::Wake Island




Location:


Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about two-thirds of the
way from Hawaii to the Northern Mariana Islands



Geographic coordinates:


19 17 N, 166 39 E



Map references:


Oceania



Area:


total: 6.5 sq km
country comparison to the world: 243
land: 6.5 sq km

water: 0 sq km



Area - comparative:


about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC



Land boundaries:


0 km



Coastline:


19.3 km



Maritime claims:


territorial sea: 12 nm

exclusive economic zone: 200 nm



Climate:


tropical



Terrain:


atoll of three low coral islands, Peale, Wake, and Wilkes, built up
on an underwater volcano; central lagoon is former crater, islands
are part of the rim



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point: unnamed location 6 m



Natural resources:


none



Land use:


arable land: 0%

permanent crops: 0%

other: 100% (2005)



Irrigated land:


0 sq km



Natural hazards:


occasional typhoons



Environment - current issues:


NA



Geography - note:


strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean; emergency landing
location for transpacific flights







People ::Wake Island




Population:


no indigenous inhabitants

note: approximately 150 military personnel and civilian contractors
maintain and operate the airfield and communications facilities
(2009)







Government ::Wake Island




Country name:


conventional long form: none

conventional short form: Wake Island



Dependency status:


unorganized, unincorporated territory of the US; administered from
Washington, DC, by the Department of the Interior; activities in the
atoll are currently conducted by the US Air Force



Legal system:


the laws of the US where applicable apply



Flag description:


the flag of the US is used







Economy ::Wake Island




Economy - overview:


Economic activity is limited to providing services to military
personnel and contractors located on the island. All food and
manufactured goods must be imported.



Electricity - production:


NA kWh







Communications ::Wake Island




Telephone system:


general assessment: satellite communications; 2 DSN circuits off the
Overseas Telephone System (OTS); located in the Hawaii area code -
808

domestic: NA

international: NA



Broadcast media:


American Armed Forces Radio and Television Service (AFRTS) provides
satellite radio/television broadcasts (2009)







Transportation ::Wake Island




Airports:


1 (2010)
country comparison to the world: 212


Airports - with paved runways:


total: 1

2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (2010)



Ports and terminals:


none; two offshore anchorages for large ships



Transportation - note:


there are no commercial or civilian flights to and from Wake Island,
except in direct support of island missions; emergency landing is
available







Military ::Wake Island




Military - note:


defense is the responsibility of the US; the US Air Force is
responsible for overall administration and operation of the island
facilities; the launch support facility is administered by the US
Missile Defense Agency (MDA)







Transnational Issues ::Wake Island




Disputes - international:


claimed by Marshall Islands









page last updated on December 28, 2010

======================================================================





