World  (World)

Introduction ::World




Background:


Globally, the 20th century was marked by: (a) two devastating world
wars; (b) the Great Depression of the 1930s; (c) the end of vast
colonial empires; (d) rapid advances in science and technology, from
the first airplane flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina (US) to the
landing on the moon; (e) the Cold War between the Western alliance
and the Warsaw Pact nations; (f) a sharp rise in living standards in
North America, Europe, and Japan; (g) increased concerns about the
environment, including loss of forests, shortages of energy and
water, the decline in biological diversity, and air pollution; (h)
the onset of the AIDS epidemic; and (i) the ultimate emergence of
the US as the only world superpower. The planet's population
continues to explode: from 1 billion in 1820, to 2 billion in 1930,
3 billion in 1960, 4 billion in 1974, 5 billion in 1988, and 6
billion in 2000. For the 21st century, the continued exponential
growth in science and technology raises both hopes (e.g., advances
in medicine) and fears (e.g., development of even more lethal
weapons of war).







Geography ::World




Geographic overview:


The surface of the earth is approximately 70.9% water and 29.1%
land. The former portion is divided into large water bodies termed
oceans. The World Factbook recognizes and describes five oceans,
which are in decreasing order of size: the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic
Ocean, Indian Ocean, Southern Ocean, and Arctic Ocean.

The land portion is generally divided into several, large, discrete
landmasses termed continents. Depending on the convention used, the
number of continents can vary from five to seven. The most common
classification recognizes seven, which are (from largest to
smallest): Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Antarctica,
Europe, and Australia. Asia and Europe are sometimes lumped together
into a Eurasian continent resulting in six continents.
Alternatively, North and South America are sometimes grouped as
simply the Americas, resulting in a continent total of six (or five,
if the Eurasia designation is used).

North America is commonly understood to include the island of
Greenland, the isles of the Caribbean, and to extend south all the
way to the Isthmus of Panama. The easternmost extent of Europe is
generally defined as being the Ural Mountains and the Ural River; on
the southeast the Caspian Sea; and on the south the Caucasus
Mountains, the Black Sea, and the Mediterranean. Portions of
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkey fall within both
Europe and Asia, but in every instance the larger section is in
Asia. These countries are considered part of both continents.
Armenia and Cyprus, which lie completely in Western Asia, are
geopolitically European countries.

Asia usually incorporates all the islands of the Philippines,
Malaysia, and Indonesia. The islands of the Pacific are often lumped
with Australia into a "land mass" termed Oceania or Australasia.
Africa's northeast extremity is frequently delimited at the Isthmus
of Suez, but for geopolitical purposes, the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula
is often included as part of Africa.

Although the above groupings are the most common, different
continental dispositions are recognized or taught in certain parts
of the world, with some arrangements more heavily based on cultural
spheres rather than physical geographic considerations.



Map references:


Political Map of the World , Physical Map of the World , Standard
Time Zones of the World



Area:


total: 510.072 million sq km

land: 148.94 million sq km

water: 361.132 million sq km

note: 70.9% of the world's surface is water, 29.1% is land



Area - comparative:


land area about 16 times the size of the US

top fifteen World Factbook entities ranked by size: Pacific Ocean
155.557 million sq km; Atlantic Ocean 76.762 million sq km; Indian
Ocean 68.556 million sq km; Southern Ocean 20.327 million sq km;
Russia 17,098,242 sq km; Arctic Ocean 14.056 million sq km;
Antarctica 14 million sq km; Canada 9,984,670 sq km; United States
9,826,675 sq km; China 9,596,961 sq km; Brazil 8,514,877 sq km;
Australia 7,741,220 sq km; European Union 4,324,782 sq km; India
3,287,263 sq km; Argentina 2,780,400 sq km

top ten largest islands: Greenland 2,166,086 sq km; New Guinea
(Indonesia, Papua New Guinea) 785,753 sq km; Borneo (Brunei,
Indonesia, Malaysia) 751,929 sq km; Madagascar 587,713 sq km; Baffin
Island (Canada) 507,451 sq km; Sumatra (Indonesia) 472,784 sq km;
Honshu (Japan) 227,963 sq km; Victoria Island (Canada) 217,291 sq
km; Great Britain (United Kingdom) 209,331 sq km; Ellesmere Island
(Canada) 196,236 sq km



Land boundaries:


the land boundaries in the world total 251,060 km (not counting
shared boundaries twice); two nations, China and Russia, each border
14 other countries

note: 45 nations and other areas are landlocked, these include:
Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
Chad, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, Holy See (Vatican City), Hungary,
Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Macedonia, Malawi, Mali, Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal,
Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Swaziland,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, West
Bank, Zambia, Zimbabwe; two of these, Liechtenstein and Uzbekistan,
are doubly landlocked



Coastline:


356,000 km

note: 95 nations and other entities are islands that border no other
countries, they include: American Samoa, Anguilla, Antigua and
Barbuda, Aruba, Ashmore and Cartier Islands, The Bahamas, Bahrain,
Baker Island, Barbados, Bermuda, Bouvet Island, British Indian Ocean
Territory, British Virgin Islands, Cape Verde, Cayman Islands,
Christmas Island, Clipperton Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Comoros, Cook Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Cuba, Curacao, Cyprus,
Dominica, Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), Faroe Islands, Fiji,
French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Greenland,
Grenada, Guam, Guernsey, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Howland
Island, Iceland, Isle of Man, Jamaica, Jan Mayen, Japan, Jarvis
Island, Jersey, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Kiribati, Madagascar,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Martinique, Mauritius, Mayotte,
Federated States of Micronesia, Midway Islands, Montserrat, Nauru,
Navassa Island, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Norfolk Island,
Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Palmyra Atoll, Paracel Islands,
Philippines, Pitcairn Islands, Puerto Rico, Reunion, Saint
Barthelemy, Saint Helena, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Pierre and Miquelon, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao
Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Spratly Islands, Sri Lanka,
Svalbard, Tokelau, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos
Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Virgin Islands, Wake Island, Wallis and
Futuna, Taiwan



Maritime claims:


a variety of situations exist, but in general, most countries make
the following claims measured from the mean low-tide baseline as
described in the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea:
territorial sea - 12 nm, contiguous zone - 24 nm, and exclusive
economic zone - 200 nm; additional zones provide for exploitation of
continental shelf resources and an exclusive fishing zone; boundary
situations with neighboring states prevent many countries from
extending their fishing or economic zones to a full 200 nm



Climate:


a wide equatorial band of hot and humid tropical climates - bordered
north and south by subtropical temperate zones - that separate two
large areas of cold and dry polar climates



Terrain:


the greatest ocean depth is the Mariana Trench at 10,924 m in the
Pacific Ocean



Elevation extremes:


lowest point: Bentley Subglacial Trench -2,555 m

note: in the oceanic realm, Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench is
the lowest point, lying -10,924 m below the surface of the Pacific
Ocean

highest point: Mount Everest 8,850 m

top ten highest mountains (measured from sea level): Mount Everest
(Nepal-China) 8,850 m; K2 (Pakistan) 8,611 m; Kanchenjunga
(Nepal-India) 8,598 m; Lhotse (Nepal) 8,516 m; Makalu (Nepal-China)
8,463 m; Cho Oyu (Nepal-China) 8,201 m; Dhaulagiri (Nepal) 8,167 m;
Manaslu (Nepal) 8,163 m; Nanga Parbat (Pakistan) 8,125 m; Anapurna
(Nepal) 8,091 m



Natural resources:


the rapid depletion of nonrenewable mineral resources, the depletion
of forest areas and wetlands, the extinction of animal and plant
species, and the deterioration in air and water quality (especially
in some countries of Eastern Europe, the former USSR, and China)
pose serious long-term problems that governments and peoples are
only beginning to address



Land use:


arable land: 10.57%

permanent crops: 1.04%

other: 88.39% (2005)



Irrigated land:


2,770,980 sq km (2003)



Natural hazards:


large areas subject to severe weather (tropical cyclones); natural
disasters (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions)

volcanism: the world is home to more than 1,500 potentially active
volcanoes, with over 500 of these having erupted in historical
times; an estimated 500 million people live near these volcanoes;
associated dangers include lava flows, lahars (mudflows),
pyroclastic flows, ash clouds, ash fall, ballistic projectiles, gas
emissions, landslides, earthquakes, and tsunamis; in the 1990s, the
International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the
Earth's Interior, created a list of 16 volcanoes worthy of special
study because of their great potential for destruction:
Avachinsky-Koryaksky (Russia), Colima (Mexico), Etna (Italy),
Galeras (Colombia), Mauna Loa (United States), Merapi (Indonesia),
Nyiragongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo), Rainier (United
States), Sakurajima (Japan), Santa Maria (Guatemala), Santorini
(Greece), Taal (Philippines), Teide (Spain), Ulawun (Papua New
Guinea), Unzen (Japan), Vesuvius (Italy)



Environment - current issues:


large areas subject to overpopulation, industrial disasters,
pollution (air, water, acid rain, toxic substances), loss of
vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of
wildlife, soil degradation, soil depletion, erosion; global warming
becoming a greater concern



Geography - note:


the world is now thought to be about 4.55 billion years old, just
about one-third of the 13.7-billion-year age estimated for the
universe







People ::World




Population:


6,768,181,146 (July 2010 est.)



Age structure:


0-14 years: 27% (male 944,987,919/female 884,268,378)

15-64 years: 65.3% (male 2,234,860,865/female 2,187,838,153)

65 years and over: 7.6% (male 227,164,176/female 289,048,221) (2010
est.)



Median age:


total: 28.4 years

male: 27.7 years

female: 29 years (2009 est.)



Population growth rate:


1.133% (2009 est.)



Birth rate:


19.86 births/1,000 population (2009 est.)



Death rate:


8.37 deaths/1,000 population (2009 est.)



Urbanization:


urban population: 50.5% of total population (2010)

rate of urbanization: 1.85% annual rate of change (2010-15 est.)

ten largest urban agglomerations: Tokyo (Japan) - 36,669,000; Delhi
(India) - 22,157,000; Sao Paulo (Brazil) - 20,262,000; Mumbai
(India) - 20,041,000; Mexico City (Mexico) - 19,460,000; New
York-Newark (US) - 19,425,000; Shanghai (China) - 16,575,000;
Kolkata (India) - 15,552,000; Dhaka (Bangladesh) - 14,648,000;
Karachi (Pakistan) - 13,125,000 (2009)



Sex ratio:


at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female

under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female

15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female

65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female

total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (2009 est.)



Infant mortality rate:


total: 44.13 deaths/1,000 live births

male: 46.19 deaths/1,000 live births

female: 41.92 deaths/1,000 live births (2009 est.)



Life expectancy at birth:


total population: 66.12 years

male: 64.29 years

female: 68.07 years (2009 est.)



Total fertility rate:


2.56 children born/woman (2009 est.)



HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate:


0.8% (2007 est.)



HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS:


33 million (2007 est.)



HIV/AIDS - deaths:


2 million (2007 est.)



Religions:


Christians 33.32% (of which Roman Catholics 16.99%, Protestants
5.78%, Orthodox 3.53%, Anglicans 1.25%), Muslims 21.01%, Hindus
13.26%, Buddhists 5.84%, Sikhs 0.35%, Jews 0.23%, Baha'is 0.12%,
other religions 11.78%, non-religious 11.77%, atheists 2.32% (2007
est.)



Languages:


Mandarin Chinese 12.65%, Spanish 4.93%, English 4.91%, Arabic 3.31%,
Hindi 2.73%, Bengali 2.71%, Portuguese 2.67%, Russian 2.16%,
Japanese 1.83%, Standard German 1.35%, Javanese 1.27% (2008 est.)

note: percents are for "first language" speakers only



Literacy:


definition: age 15 and over can read and write

total population: 82%

male: 87%

female: 77%

note: over two-thirds of the world's 785 million illiterate adults
are found in only eight countries (Bangladesh, China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Pakistan); of all the
illiterate adults in the world, two-thirds are women; extremely low
literacy rates are concentrated in three regions, the Arab states,
South and West Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa, where around one-third
of the men and half of all women are illiterate (2005 est.)







Government ::World




Administrative divisions:


266 countries, dependent areas, and other entities



Legal system:


all members of the UN are parties to the statute that established
the International Court of Justice (ICJ) or World Court







Economy ::World




Economy - overview:


In 2010, world output - and per capita income - began to recover
from the 2008-09 recession, the first global downturn since 1946.
Gross World Product (GWP) grew 4.6%, largely on the strength of
rebounding exports, which rose about 20% from the level of 2009.
Growth was not evenly distributed across countries, however. Lower
income countries - those with per capita incomes below $30,000 per
year - averaged 6.3% growth, while higher income countries - with
per capita incomes above $30,000 - averaged just 2.8% growth. And
countries with current account surpluses averaged 6.0% growth, while
those with current account deficits averaged just 3.4% growth. Among
large economies, China (+10.1%), Taiwan (+8.3%), India (+8.3%),
Brazil (+7.5%), and South Korea (+6.1%) recorded the biggest GDP
gains - China also became the world's largest exporter. Continuing
uncertainties in mortgage and financial markets resulted in slower
growth in Japan (+3.0%), the US (+2.8%), and the European Union
(+1.7%). In 2010, global unemployment continued to creep upwards,
reaching 8.8% - underemployment, especially in the developing world,
remained much higher. Global gross fixed investment stabilized at
about 23% of GWP, after a significant drop in 2009. World trade
appears to be returning to pre-2009 patterns, with current account
surpluses or deficits rising for a majority of countries. World
external debt, however, dropped again in 2010 - about 5% from the
2009 level, as many countries reduced borrowing. Many, if not most,
countries pursued expansionary monetary and fiscal policies. The
global money supply, both narrowly and broadly defined, increased
roughly 10%, as countries tried to keep interest rates low; the
global budget deficit stablilized at roughly $3.5 trillion, as
countries tried to rein in spending and slow the rise of public debt.



The international financial crisis of 2008-09 presents the world
economy with a major new challenge, together with several
long-standing ones. The fiscal stimulus packages put in place in
2009-10 required most countries to run budget deficits - government
balances have deteriorated for 14 out of every 15 countries.
Treasuries issued new public debt - totaling $5.5 trillion since
2008 - to pay for the additional expenditures. To keep interest
rates low, many central banks monetized that debt, injecting large
sums of money into the economies. As economic activity picks up,
central banks will face the difficult task of containing inflation
without raising interest rates so high they snuff out further
growth. At the same time, governments will face the difficult task
of spurring current growth and employment without saddling their
economies with so much debt that they sacrifice long-term growth and
financial stability.



Long-standing challenges the world faces are several. The addition
of 80 million people each year to an already overcrowded globe is
exacerbating the problems of underemployment, pollution,
waste-disposal, epidemics, water-shortages, famine, over-fishing of
oceans, deforestation, desertification, and depletion of
non-renewable resources. The nation-state, as a bedrock
economic-political institution, is steadily losing control over
international flows of people, goods, funds, and technology.
Internally, central governments often find their control over
resources slipping as separatist regional movements - typically
based on ethnicity - gain momentum, e.g., in many of the successor
states of the former Soviet Union, in the former Yugoslavia, in
India, in Iraq, in Indonesia, and in Canada. Externally, central
governments are losing decisionmaking powers to international
bodies, most notably the EU. The introduction of the euro as the
common currency of much of Western Europe in January 1999, while
paving the way for an integrated economic powerhouse, poses economic
risks because the participating nations are culturally and
politically diverse and have varying levels and rates of growth of
income, and hence, differing needs for monetary and fiscal policies.
In Western Europe, governments face the difficult political problem
of channeling resources away from welfare programs in order to
increase investment and strengthen incentives to seek employment.
Because of their own internal problems and priorities, the
industrialized countries devote insufficient resources to deal
effectively with the poorer areas of the world, which, at least from
an economic point of view, are becoming further marginalized. The
terrorist attacks on the US on 11 September 2001 accentuated a
growing risk to global prosperity, illustrated, for example, by the
reallocation of resources away from investment to anti-terrorist
programs. Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan added new uncertainties to
global economic prospects.



Despite these challenges, the world economy also shows great
promise. Technology has made possible further advances in all
fields, from agriculture, to medicine, alternative energy,
metallurgy, and transportation. Improved global communications have
greatly reduced the costs of international trade, helping the world
gain from the international division of labor, raise living
standards, and reduce income disparities among nations. Much of the
resilience of the world economy in the aftermath of the financial
crisis resulted from government leaders around the globe working in
concert to stem the financial onslaught, knowing well the lessons of
past economic failures.



GDP (purchasing power parity):


$74.43 trillion (2010 est.)

$71.17 trillion (2009 est.)

$71.67 trillion (2008 est.)

note: data are in 2010 US dollars



GDP (official exchange rate):


GWP (gross world product): $62.22 trillion (2010 est.)



GDP - real growth rate:


4.6% (2010 est.)

-0.7% (2009 est.)

2.7% (2008 est.)



GDP - per capita (PPP):


$11,100 (2010 est.)

$10,800 (2009 est.)

$11,000 (2008 est.)

note: data are in 2010 US dollars



GDP - composition by sector:


agriculture: 5.8%

industry: 30.8%

services: 63.4% (2010 est.)



Labor force:


3.232 billion (2010 est.)



Labor force - by occupation:


agriculture: 37.3%

industry: 21.7%

services: 41% (2005 est.)



Unemployment rate:


8.8% (2010 est.)

8.2% (2009 est.)

note: 30% (2007 est.) combined unemployment and underemployment in
many non-industrialized countries; developed countries typically
4%-12% unemployment



Household income or consumption by percentage share:


lowest 10%: 2.7%

highest 10%: 27.3% (2005 est.)



Investment (gross fixed):


23.4% of GDP (2010 est.)

23.1% of GDP (2009 est.) (2010 est.)



Public debt:


58.3% of GDP (2010 est.)

56.2% of GDP (2009 est.)



Inflation rate (consumer prices):


developed countries 2.5%

developing countries 5.6%

note: developed countries 0% to 4% typically; developing countries
5% to 10% typically; national inflation rates vary widely in
individual cases; inflation rates have declined for most countries
for the last several years, held in check by increasing
international competition from several low wage countries, and by
soft demand as a result of the world financial crisis (2010 est.)



Stock of narrow money:


$22.4 trillion (31 December 2010 est)

$20.87 trillion (31 December 2009 est)



Stock of broad money:


$75.86 trillion (31 December 2010 est.)

$68.54 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)



Stock of domestic credit:


$104.2 trillion (31 December 2010 est.)

$94.49 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)



Market value of publicly traded shares:


$48.85 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)

$36.41 trillion (31 December 2008)

$64.6 trillion (31 December 2007 est.)



Industries:


dominated by the onrush of technology, especially in computers,
robotics, telecommunications, and medicines and medical equipment;
most of these advances take place in OECD nations; only a small
portion of non-OECD countries have succeeded in rapidly adjusting to
these technological forces; the accelerated development of new
industrial (and agricultural) technology is complicating already
grim environmental problems



Industrial production growth rate:


4.6% (2010 est.)



Electricity - production:


19.25 trillion kWh (2007 est.)



Electricity - consumption:


17.93 trillion kWh (2007 est.)



Electricity - exports:


615.4 billion kWh (2008 est.)



Electricity - imports:


613.9 billion kWh (2008 est.)



Oil - production:


84.24 million bbl/day (2009 est.)



Oil - consumption:


83.62 million bbl/day (2009 est.)



Oil - exports:


61.37 million bbl/day (2007 est.)



Oil - imports:


63.77 million bbl/day (2007 est.)



Oil - proved reserves:


1.378 trillion bbl (1 January 2010 est.)



Natural gas - production:


3.127 trillion cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - consumption:


3.073 trillion cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - exports:


949.9 billion cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - imports:


947.2 billion cu m (2008 est.)



Natural gas - proved reserves:


187.8 trillion cu m (1 January 2010 est.)



Exports:


$14.9 trillion (2010 est.)

$12.39 trillion (2009)



Exports - commodities:


the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and services

top ten - share of world trade: electrical machinery, including
computers 14.8%; mineral fuels, including oil, coal, gas, and
refined products 14.4%; nuclear reactors, boilers, and parts 14.2%;
cars, trucks, and buses 8.9%; scientific and precision instruments
3.5%; plastics 3.4%; iron and steel 2.7%; organic chemicals 2.6%;
pharmaceutical products 2.6%; diamonds, pearls, and precious stones
1.9%



Exports - partners:


US 12.7%, Germany 7.2%, China 6.4%, France 4.5%, Japan 4.3%, UK 4.2%
(2008 est.)



Imports:


$14.68 trillion (2010)

$12.19 trillion (2009)



Imports - commodities:


the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and services

top ten - share of world trade: see listing for exports



Imports - partners:


China 10.3%, Germany 8.7%, US 8%, Japan 5% (2008 est.)



Debt - external:


$59.09 trillion (31 December 2010 est.)

$62.25 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)

note: this figure is the sum total of all countries' external debt,
both public and private



Stock of direct foreign investment - at home:


$17.53 trillion (31 December 2010 est.)

$16.51 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)



Stock of direct foreign investment - abroad:


$18.19 trillion (31 December 2010 est.)

$17.28 trillion (31 December 2009 est.)







Communications ::World




Telephones - main lines in use:


1.268 billion (2008)



Telephones - mobile cellular:


5.3 billion (2010)



Telephone system:


general assessment: NA

domestic: NA

international: NA



Internet users:


2.1 billion (2010)







Transportation ::World




Airports:


total airports - 44,010 (2010)

top ten by passengers: Atlanta (ATL) - 88,032,086; London (LHR) -
66,037,578; Beijing (PEK) - 65,372,012; Chicago (ORD) - 64,158,343;
Tokyo (HND) - 61,903,656; Paris (CDG) - 57,906,866; Los Angeles
(LAX) - 56,520,843; Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW) - 56,030,457; Frankfurt
(FRA) - 50,932,840; Denver (DEN) - 50,167,485 (2009)

top ten by cargo (metric tons): Memphis (MEM) - 3,697,054; Hong Kong
(HKG) - 3,385,313; Shanghai (PVG) - 2,543,394; Inch'on (ICN) -
2,313,001; Paris (CDG) - 2,054,515; Anchorage (ANC) - 1,994,629;
Louisville (SDF) - 1,949,528; Dubai (DXB) - 1,927,520; Frankfurt
(FRA) - 1,887,686; Tokyo (NRT) - 1,851,972 (2009)



Heliports:


3,825 (2010)



Railways:


total: 1,138,632 km (2008)



Roadways:


total: 102,260,304 km (2008)



Waterways:


671,886 km (2004)

top ten longest rivers: Nile (Africa) 6,693 km; Amazon (South
America) 6,436 km; Mississippi-Missouri (North America) 6,238 km;
Yenisey-Angara (Asia) 5,981 km; Ob-Irtysh (Asia) 5,569 km; Yangtze
(Asia) 5,525 km; Yellow (Asia) 4,671 km; Amur (Asia) 4,352 km; Lena
(Asia) 4,345 km; Congo (Africa) 4,344 km

note: if measured by volume, the Amazon is the largest river in the
world



Ports and terminals:


top ten container ports as measured by Twenty-Foot Equivalent Units
(TEUs) throughput: Singapore - 25,866,400; Shanghai - 25,002,000;
Hong Kong - 20,983,000; Shenzhen (China) - 18,250,100; Pusan (South
Korea) - 11,954,861; Guangzhou (China) - 11,190,000; Dubai (UAE) -
11,124,082; Ningbo (China) - 10,502,800; Qingdao (China) -
10,260,000; - Rotterdam - 9,743,290 (2009)



Transportation - note:


as of September 2009, incidents of piracy around the world have more
than doubled over the comparable time period in 2008; half of all
attacks occur in the waters off Somalia, primarily in the Gulf of
Aden; other high risk areas include the waters off Nigeria, the
South China Sea, and waters off Malaysia







Military ::World




Military expenditures:


roughly 2% of GDP of gross world product (2005 est.)







Transnational Issues ::World




Disputes - international:


stretching over 250,000 km, the world's 322 international land
boundaries separate 194 independent states and 71 dependencies,
areas of special sovereignty, and other miscellaneous entities;
ethnicity, culture, race, religion, and language have divided states
into separate political entities as much as history, physical
terrain, political fiat, or conquest, resulting in sometimes
arbitrary and imposed boundaries; most maritime states have claimed
limits that include territorial seas and exclusive economic zones;
overlapping limits due to adjacent or opposite coasts create the
potential for 430 bilateral maritime boundaries of which 209 have
agreements that include contiguous and non-contiguous segments;
boundary, borderland/resource, and territorial disputes vary in
intensity from managed or dormant to violent or militarized;
undemarcated, indefinite, porous, and unmanaged boundaries tend to
encourage illegal cross-border activities, uncontrolled migration,
and confrontation; territorial disputes may evolve from historical
and/or cultural claims, or they may be brought on by resource
competition; ethnic and cultural clashes continue to be responsible
for much of the territorial fragmentation and internal displacement
of the estimated 6.6 million people and cross-border displacements
of 8.6 million refugees around the world as of early 2006; just over
one million refugees were repatriated in the same period; other
sources of contention include access to water and mineral
(especially hydrocarbon) resources, fisheries, and arable land;
armed conflict prevails not so much between the uniformed armed
forces of independent states as between stateless armed entities
that detract from the sustenance and welfare of local populations,
leaving the community of nations to cope with resultant refugees,
hunger, disease, impoverishment, and environmental degradation



Refugees and internally displaced persons:


the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimated
that in December 2006 there was a global population of 8.8 million
registered refugees and as many as 24.5 million IDPs in more than 50
countries; the actual global population of refugees is probably
closer to 10 million given the estimated 1.5 million Iraqi refugees
displaced throughout the Middle East (2007)



Trafficking in persons:


current situation: approximately 800,000 people, mostly women and
children, are trafficked annually across national borders, not
including millions trafficked within their own countries; at least
80% of the victims are female and up to 50% are minors; 75% of all
victims are trafficked into commercial sexual exploitation; almost
two-thirds of the global victims are trafficked intra-regionally
within East Asia and the Pacific (260,000 to 280,000 people) and
Europe and Eurasia (170,000 to 210,000 people)

Tier 2 Watch List: Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Federated
States of Micronesia, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Iraq, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Mali, Moldova, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of the Congo, Russia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Yemen

Tier 3: Burma, Chad, Cuba, Eritrea, Fiji, Iran, Kuwait, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Niger, North Korea, Papua New Guinea, Saudi Arabia,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Zimbabwe (2009)



Illicit drugs:


cocaine: worldwide coca leaf cultivation in 2007 amounted to 232,500
hectares; Colombia produced slightly more than two-thirds of the
worldwide crop, followed by Peru and Bolivia; potential pure cocaine
production decreased 7% to 865 metric tons in 2007; Colombia
conducts an aggressive coca eradication campaign, but both Peruvian
and Bolivian Governments are hesitant to eradicate coca in key
growing areas; 551 metric tons of export-quality cocaine (85% pure)
is documented to have been seized or destroyed in 2005; US
consumption of export quality cocaine is estimated to have been in
excess of 380 metric tons

opiates: worldwide illicit opium poppy cultivation continued to
increase in 2007, with a potential opium production of 8,400 metric
tons, reaching the highest levels recorded since estimates began in
mid-1980s; Afghanistan is world's primary opium producer, accounting
for 95% of the global supply; Southeast Asia - responsible for 9% of
global opium - saw marginal increases in production; Latin America
produced 1% of global opium, but most was refined into heroin
destined for the US market; if all potential opium was processed
into pure heroin, the potential global production would be 1,000
metric tons of heroin in 2007









page last updated on January 20, 2011

======================================================================





